data\Connolly, Griffiths, & Savarie, 1978.pdfaccess_permission:can_modify: true
title: TOXIC COLLAR FOR CONTROL OF SHEEP-KILLING COYOTES: A PROGRESS REPORT
dc:title: TOXIC COLLAR FOR CONTROL OF SHEEP-KILLING COYOTES: A PROGRESS REPORT
X-TIKA:parse_time_millis: 46
access_permission:assemble_document: true
dc:creator: Guy E. Connolly, Richard E. Griffiths Jr., and Peter J. Savarie
pdf:docinfo:custom:Appligent: APSetDocInfo 2.2.2 Jan 16 2008
access_permission:can_print_degraded: true
created: Tue Nov 05 06:39:13 PST 2013
meta:save-date: 2013-11-05T14:39:13Z
pdf:PDFVersion: 1.6
access_permission:fill_in_form: true
pdf:docinfo:modified: 2013-11-05T14:39:13Z
pdf:encrypted: false
X-Parsed-By: 
org.apache.tika.parser.DefaultParser
org.apache.tika.parser.pdf.PDFParser
Last-Save-Date: 2013-11-05T14:39:13Z
SPDF: 1122.1
dcterms:modified: 2013-11-05T14:39:13Z
pdf:docinfo:creator_tool: Appligent APSetDocInfo 2.2.2
Appligent: APSetDocInfo 2.2.2 Jan 16 2008
meta:author: Guy E. Connolly, Richard E. Griffiths Jr., and Peter J. Savarie
Author: Guy E. Connolly, Richard E. Griffiths Jr., and Peter J. Savarie
access_permission:extract_for_accessibility: true
Creation-Date: 2013-11-05T14:39:13Z
pdf:docinfo:creator: Guy E. Connolly, Richard E. Griffiths Jr., and Peter J. Savarie
meta:creation-date: 2013-11-05T14:39:13Z
xmpTPg:NPages: 10
access_permission:extract_content: true
access_permission:modify_annotations: true
pdf:docinfo:custom:SPDF: 1122.1
pdf:docinfo:title: TOXIC COLLAR FOR CONTROL OF SHEEP-KILLING COYOTES: A PROGRESS REPORT
access_permission:can_print: true
date: 2013-11-05T14:39:13Z
dc:format: application/pdf; version=1.6
pdf:docinfo:producer: SPDF
modified: 2013-11-05T14:39:13Z
producer: SPDF
Last-Modified: 2013-11-05T14:39:13Z
pdf:docinfo:created: 2013-11-05T14:39:13Z
creator: Guy E. Connolly, Richard E. Griffiths Jr., and Peter J. Savarie
xmp:CreatorTool: Appligent APSetDocInfo 2.2.2
Content-Type: application/pdf
dcterms:created: 2013-11-05T14:39:13Z
!PDF_CONTENT!
--------------------------------












































TOXIC COLLAR FOR CONTROL OF SHEEP-KILLING COYOTES: A PROGRESS REPORT


University of Nebraska - Lincoln
DigitalCommons@University of Nebraska - Lincoln
Proceedings of the 8th Vertebrate Pest Conference
(1978) Vertebrate Pest Conference Proceedings collection

3-1-1978

TOXIC COLLAR FOR CONTROL OF SHEEP-
KILLING COYOTES: A PROGRESS REPORT
Guy E. Connolly
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Denver Wildlife Research Center, Building 16, Federal Center, Denver, Colorado

Richard E. Griffiths Jr.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Denver Wildlife Research Center, Building 16, Federal Center, Denver, Colorado

Peter J. Savarie
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Denver Wildlife Research Center, Building 16, Federal Center, Denver, Colorado

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/vpc8
Part of the Environmental Health and Protection Commons

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Vertebrate Pest Conference Proceedings collection at DigitalCommons@University of
Nebraska - Lincoln. It has been accepted for inclusion in Proceedings of the 8th Vertebrate Pest Conference (1978) by an authorized administrator of
DigitalCommons@University of Nebraska - Lincoln.

Connolly, Guy E.; Griffiths, Richard E. Jr.; and Savarie, Peter J., "TOXIC COLLAR FOR CONTROL OF SHEEP-KILLING
COYOTES: A PROGRESS REPORT" (1978). Proceedings of the 8th Vertebrate Pest Conference (1978). Paper 11.
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/vpc8/11

http://digitalcommons.unl.edu?utm_source=digitalcommons.unl.edu%2Fvpc8%2F11&utm_medium=PDF&utm_campaign=PDFCoverPages
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/vpc8?utm_source=digitalcommons.unl.edu%2Fvpc8%2F11&utm_medium=PDF&utm_campaign=PDFCoverPages
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/vpc8?utm_source=digitalcommons.unl.edu%2Fvpc8%2F11&utm_medium=PDF&utm_campaign=PDFCoverPages
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/vpccollection?utm_source=digitalcommons.unl.edu%2Fvpc8%2F11&utm_medium=PDF&utm_campaign=PDFCoverPages
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/vpc8?utm_source=digitalcommons.unl.edu%2Fvpc8%2F11&utm_medium=PDF&utm_campaign=PDFCoverPages
http://network.bepress.com/hgg/discipline/172?utm_source=digitalcommons.unl.edu%2Fvpc8%2F11&utm_medium=PDF&utm_campaign=PDFCoverPages
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/vpc8/11?utm_source=digitalcommons.unl.edu%2Fvpc8%2F11&utm_medium=PDF&utm_campaign=PDFCoverPages


TOXIC COLLAR FOR CONTROL OF SHEEP-KILLING COYOTES:                                      
A PROGRESS REPORT 

GUY E. CONNOLLY, RICHARD E. GRIFFITHS, JR., and PETER J. SAVARIE, U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service, Denver Wildlife Research Center, Building 16, Federal Center, Denver, Colorado    
80225 

ABSTRACT:  The toxic sheep collar is the most selective method known for killing coyotes that prey on 
domestic sheep. The concept dates back to the early 1900's, and has been studied at the Denver Wildlife 
Research Center (DWRC) since 1974.  Field tests with sodium cyanide (NaCN) in 1975 were unsuccessful 
due to repellent properties of the toxicant and to the apparent reluctance of coyotes to attack 
tethered lambs wearing bulky collars.  Coyotes attacked one or more tethered, collared lambs in 7 of 
the 19 test pastures.  In all, 14 collared lambs were attacked.  Eight of the collars were punctured 
but no dead coyotes were recovered. 

A smaller collar containing diphacinone was field tested in 1976. The diphacinone-filled collars 
were readily accepted by coyotes and lethal to them, but the slow action (5-16 days between dosing and 
death) of diphacinone made it difficult to assess the effectiveness of these collars under field 
conditions. Target flocks containing 1 to 12 collared lambs plus uncollared ewes were placed in 15 
fenced pastures from which the larger ranch flocks had been removed after repeated coyote predation.  
One or more collared lambs were attacked in 11 of the 15 tests.  An unknown number of coyotes was 
killed, and in most tests the subsequent incidence of predation was lower than that before the test. 
Captive coyotes continued to kill sheep for 4 or 5 days after they received a lethal dose of diphacinone; 
therefore a faster-acting toxicant is needed. 

This research has shown that problem coyotes can be killed with toxic collars, but further studies 
are needed to determine the feasibility of this approach compared with traditional means of control.  
In most tests to date the frequency of coyote predation has been too low and too irregular to permit 
effective use of the collar; target flocks were in the field for an average of 10 days before being 
attacked. The known disadvantages of the method include the need to sacrifice live lambs, the human 
hazards associated with the use of toxicants under field conditions, and the costs of managing target 
flocks and other sheep in the problem areas. 

For many years the Animal Damage Control (ADC) Program of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has 
attempted to limit predator control as closely as possible to the individual predator or local predator 
population that is causing or about to cause damage. In keeping with that objective, the ADC Program, 
through its research arm at the Denver Wildlife Research Center (DWRC), has worked to improve the 
safety and selectivity of methods for reducing coyote depredations on livestock. Of all the methods 
available, the toxic sheep collar is the most selective one for killing coyotes that prey upon domestic 
sheep.  Since coyotes typically kill sheep by biting them on or under the neck (Figure 1; Connolly 
et al., 1976; Nass, 1977; Henne, 1977), the coyotes that attack collared sheep usually rupture the 
collar with their teeth and thus receive a lethal, oral dose of the toxicant. 

The toxic collar concept dates back at least to Duncombe (1920) who patented a wire-ring device 
consisting of two toxicant-filled syringes attached to either side of a sheep's neck. The DWRC has 
worked with the toxic collar concept since 1974. Earlier, a collar containing 1080 solution had been 
developed in Texas by Roy McBride, a former employee of the ADC Program and the DWRC.  Before the 
1972 Presidential ban on the use of toxicants in predator control, McBride used the collars to stop 
depredations on sheep ranges where problem coyotes had eluded all other means of control.  His 
procedure was to put collars on 15 to 20 lambs and place them with their ewes on the bedground where 
kills had been taking place. The remaining sheep were corralled or herded away from the trouble zone 
until one or more collared lambs were killed.  On 13 of 14 ranches where these tactics were used, 
dead lambs with ruptured collars were found and the predation losses immediately stopped (R. McBride, 
personal communication). On the basis of these results, McBride (1974) patented the leather-sheathed 
collar containing a rubber bladder to be filled with either a toxicant or aversive solution. 

In February 1972, all uses of toxicants for predator control by Federal agents or on Federal lands 
were prohibited by Executive Order No. 11643.  This prohibition applied to research as well, but when 
it appeared that the Order might be modified to permit the use of NaCN in the M-44 device, or sodium 
cyanide spring loaded ejector mechanism (Matheny, 1976), the DWRC began work on a toxic collar to use 
this toxicant. The collar research program of the DWRC proceeded through seven phases, as follows: 

(1) Development of a sheep collar that killed captive coyotes with NaCN. 

(2) Field tests of the NaCN collar. 

(3) Pen tests to develop alternate toxicants and to improve the collar configuration. 

(4) Field tests of the diphacinone collar. 

(5) More pen tests to develop alternate toxicants, including 1080, and to further improve the 
collar device itself. 

197 



(6) Negotiations with the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for an experimental use permit 
for 1080 in the toxic collar. 

(7) Field tests of the 1080 collar. 

Phase (1), the development of the NaCN collar, has been reported elsewhere (Savarie and Sterner, 
1977), and the field tests with 1080 (phase 7) are now in progress under EPA Experimental Use permit 
No. 6704-EUP-14 issued in September 1977.  Therefore this report is limited to the field tests with 
NaCN and diphacinone, together with the related chemical screening and collar modifications that led 
to the issuance of the current experimental use permit. 

FIELD TESTS OF THE SODIUM CYANIDE TOXIC COLLAR 

By early 1975, a polyvinylchloride (PVC) toxic collar had been developed at the DWRC. It consisted 
of 10 packets, each containing 50 ml of 33% NaCN in water, that were assembled and attached to the lamb 
with nylon cord (Figure 2). Of 12 captive coyotes that attacked sheep equipped with this collar or 
previous models, 9 were killed.  Four of these coyotes attacked tethered, collared lambs, and all 4 
were killed (Savarie and Sterner, 1977). 

 

 

Figure 1.  Coyotes usually kill sheep by biting 
them on the underside of the throat. 
This characteristic attack pattern led 
to the idea of a sheep neck collar 
filled with toxicant, so that any 
coyote biting through the collar would 
be poisoned. University of California 
photo by G.E. Connolly. 

Figure 2.  A sodium cyanide toxic collar at a test 
site in North Dakota in 1975.  This 
collar contained 500 ml of 33% NaCN 
solution. The lamb is tethered by its 
right hind foot. USFWS photo by G.E. 
Connolly. 

Field tests of the NaCN collar were conducted in North Dakota (13 ranches), Montana (3 sites on 1 
ranch), and Texas (3 ranches) from August through October 1975. Most of the work was done in North 
Dakota because, through previous experience, a key man on the project (R.E. Severson) had intimate 
knowledge of the coyote problem areas in that state. The intent of each test was to document this 
sequence of events: 

(1) Occurrence of frequent and regular coyote predation on sheep; 

(2) Removal of one or more coyotes with the toxic collar; 

(3) Reduced incidence of predation after removal of the problem coyotes. 

Because it would have been neither feasible nor safe to put a NaCn collar on every sheep in a 
large flock, collars were placed only on a few tethered lambs (Figure 2) in each test. Previous trials 
without collars had shown that coyotes could be induced to attack lambs that were tethered along the 
routes habitually traveled by sheep-killing coyotes. In each pasture where the NaCN collars were 
tested, we attempted to place the collared lambs where they would be encountered by approaching coyotes. 
The number of collars in each test varied from one to five. 

Under these test conditions, the NaCN collar was ineffective. Coyotes attacked collared lambs at 
only 7 of the 19 test sites.  In 574 exposure nights (1 exposure night = 1 collared lamb tethered in 
the field for 1 night) only 14 collared sheep were attacked. Eight of the 14 collars were punctured. 
Because NaCN takes effect within minutes, we expected to find the carcasses of attacking coyotes within 
a few hundred yards of the punctured collars. However, no dead coyotes were recovered. Most of the 
attacks on collared sheep were followed by additional kills of uncollared sheep in the test areas; 
therefore we believe that the problem coyotes were neither killed nor repelled from the test areas.  
The failure of the NaCN collar was attributed to 3 causes:  (1) reluctance of coyotes to attack 
tethered lambs; (2) frequent avoidance of collars by attacking coyotes, presumably because of repellent 
properties of the collar or toxicant, or both; and (3) repellent properties of the toxicant, which 
caused coyotes to break off the attack before they received a lethal dose. 

198 



The apparent failure of the NaCN collar under field conditions was unexpected, in view of its 
effectiveness against captive coyotes (Savarie and Sterner, 1977).  We are unable to offer an 
explanation for this difference between captive and wild coyotes, other than to speculate that the 
captive animals were exposed and possibly accustomed to a variety of unnatural artifacts, so that they 
may have been less wary of the collar and toxicant than were wild coyotes. In any event, it appeared 
that a smaller, less conspicuous collar and a non-repellent toxicant were needed.  And because the 
rate of attack on tethered, collared lambs was low (1 attack per 41 exposure nights), we felt that the 
tethered lamb concept should be abandoned in favor of other means of inducing coyote predation on the 
collared lambs. All three of these avenues for improvement were explored. 

THE SEARCH FOR ALTERNATE TOXICANTS 

After the unsuccessful field tests with NaCN, a systematic search was made for other toxicants 
(including alternative formulations of NaCN) that might be more effective. Computer searches, 
literature reviews, and personal contacts with chemical companies and universities were used to seek 
chemicals that met the following criteria: 

(1) No taste or odor, or non-repellent taste or odor. 

(2) Single, low oral dose that would kill the coyote within 24 hours. 

(3) Commercially available and economical. 

(4) Low residue after death of the coyote, so as to minimize secondary toxicity problems. 

(5) Antidote or practical treatment available. 

(6) Potential for EPA registration for use in predator control. 

Chemicals with established pesticide uses were given high priority because the published data on 
these compounds could be used in support of registration. Not all of the toxicants that have been 
considered for possible use in the toxic collar are listed here. The search for effective toxicants is 
still in progress and will be reported elsewhere.  In 1976, this search resulted in the identification 
of 4 compounds that appeared to merit at least preliminary trials in the collar. These compounds--
diphacinone, mandelonitrile, 4-aminopyridine, and phosphamidon--were tested against captive coyotes in 
1976, and 1080 was tested in early 1977. 

In addition to the search for alternate toxicants, a concerted effort was made to reformulate NaCN 
so as to reduce its repellent properties.  Because we believed that NaCN in water had an offensive 
taste due to its high pH (+12), we attempted to reduce the pH with phosphate and boric acid buffers. 
NaCN also was formulated in five thixotropic suspensions, in glycerine, and in microencapsulated form 
in the hope that these treatments would mask its undesirable taste and odor. All of these efforts were 
unsuccessful. 

Pen tests with a variety of toxicants and formulations were conducted with both pen-reared and wild, 
captive coyotes in 1-hectare (2.5-acre) pens at Logan, Utah (Table 1). Before exposure to a collared 
sheep, each coyote was fed lamb meat and penned with sheep until it would readily attack and kill lambs 
of at least 60 pounds (27 kg) live weight.  The candidate toxicants were tested in toxic collars on 
sheep that were exposed to the coyotes. Twenty-six coyotes were killed in 60 tests; one or more coyotes 
was killed with most formulations. 

Of all the chemical mixtures that were tested in toxic collars at Logan, only diphacinone and 1080 
appeared to be effective enough to warrant field use. A 5% concentration of diphacinone killed all the 
coyotes exposed to it. At lower concentrations about half of the coyotes were killed. Compound 1080 
killed all 6 coyotes that punctured PVC collars containing 5 mg/ml or more, and was partly effective at 
lower concentrations. Neither diphacinone nor 1080 appeared to have the repellent or aversive properties 
that were seen with every other toxicant, including all formulations of NaCN. 

The coyotes that punctured collars containing NaCN, mandelonitrile, 4-aminopyridine, or phosphamidon 
characteristically released their grip on the lamb as soon as they detected the toxicant.  Immediately 
they shook their heads and rubbed their muzzles on the ground in what we interpreted as efforts to 
clear the undesirable taste from their mouths. Mandelonitrile and phosphamidon exhibited the additional 
disadvantage of chemical incompatibility with the PVC collars. 

These results reinforced our conviction that a non-repellent toxicant was essential to a success-
ful toxic collar. The only alternative would have been a pressurized device to expell the toxicant 
rapidly upon puncture; this concept was rejected on grounds of excessive hazard to humans. 

Throughout these evaluations of alternate toxicants, 1080 appeared to be the chemical of choice 
except for two problems: it has no effective antidote and it may be unregisterable because of its 
controversial history of use in predator control. Nevertheless we believe that 1080 can be used 
safely in the toxic collar. Limited field tests with this compound are planned in 1978. 

199 



Table 1.  Effectiveness of selected toxicants in toxic sheep collars against captive coyotes at Logan, 
Utah, in 1976 and 1977. 

 1Collar configurations: 
I: Four PVC packets, each containing 40 ml of the formulations, arranged as shown in Figure 3. 

II: Two PVC packets, similar to configuration I but with one packet on each side of the neck of 
the sheep. 

III: One-piece PVC collar with two reservoirs containing 20-25 ml each, mounted underneath the 
neck of the sheep (Fig. 4).                                                             

IV: One-piece collar similar to configuration III, but made of rubber rather than PVC. 
230.6% NaCN, 43.5% H20, 23.1% Glycerol, and 2.8% KOH. 
333% NaCN, 66% light mineral oil, and 0.1% Atlas G-1702 surfactant. 
425% NaCN in vinyl resin capsules with 48% cod liver oil and 2% Silanox 101; Southwest Res. Institute     
formulation #6-957. 
5C6H5CH(0H)CN, technical grade. 
6Avitrol, 100 mg/ml in cod liver oil. 
7Commercial spray, 958 mg/ml. Low rate of punctures was due to chemical reaction which made the PVC  
bladders flaccid. 
8Vampiricida suspension made by Motomco, Clark, NJ. This was diluted with water to obtain the 2 1/2% 
and 1 1/4% concentration s,  

9Several coyotes that killed the lambs missed the collars, apparently because of deep snow that altered 
the attack pattern. In addition to the attacking coyotes that were killed, 3 other coyotes also died 
after feeding on the carcasses of the collared sheep. 

10Compound 1080, technical grade, made by Tull Chemical Co., Oxford, AL.  This material is warranted 
to contain at least 90% sodium monofluoroacetate. Thus the collars with 11.1 mg/ml of 1080 contained 
10 mg/ml of sodium monofluoroacetate.                                                                       
11The second collar ruptured along a seam when the coyote bit it, so that the poison was not expelled      
into the coyote's mouth. 

IMPROVEMENTS IN THE CONSTRUCTION AND CONFIGURATION OF THE TOXIC COLLAR 

As noted earlier, the field tests of the NaCN collar indicated an apparent reluctance by coyotes 
to attack and bite it. Therefore we reduced its size and bulk, and also improved the mode of attachment 
and camouflage. These aspects of the collar development program were pursued both by project personnel 
and by Roy McBride under contract with the DWRC, and all improvements were tested against captive 
coyotes at Logan, Utah. In most of these tests the collars contained water, cod liver oil, or other 
non-toxic materials so as to reduce the number of coyotes sacrificed in the testing program. 

                                               200 



Beginning with the 10-packet collar (Figure 2) used in the NaCN tests, the following modifications 
were tested: (1) reduced number of packets; (2) reduced size of individual packets; (3) variations in 
thickness of PVC from which packets were made (original material was 0.020 inches thick); (4) use of 
other plastics and rubber, rather than PVC; (5) redesigned fill value to protrude internally rather 
than externally; and (6) use of velcro rather than nylon cord to attach collars to sheep. 

The packets used in the NaCN collars were made of white PVC. Numerous types of camouflage were 
tested, including wool glued on with rubber cement, fiberglass flocking, burlap fabric covering, and 
pieces of women's pantyhose. No camouflage was satisfactory. A completely different, and apparently 
successful, approach to this problem was suggested by R.J. Burns (personal communication), a cooperating 
biologist with another project at Logan. He had observed that coyotes were attracted to black-colored 
areas on other coyotes, so he proposed that the collars should be black. We have been using black, 
uncamouflaged collars since August 1976 and find that coyotes bite them readily. 

The NaCN collars were assembled and attached to the lambs with nylon cord.  This worked well in 
pen tests where the collars were in place for only a few hours, but in field trials the cord cut into 
the skin of the lambs and caused open wounds. We solved the abrasion problem by using 0.75-inch wide 
velcro straps in place of the nylon cord. In addition, the velcro holds the collars more securely and 
permits more rapid attachment and removal of the collars. 

By March 1976, these efforts to improve the configuration of the toxic collar had resulted in a 
4-packet collar (Figure 3) that contained only 40 percent as much toxicant as did the earlier model 
(Figure 2). The 4-packet collar was used in field tests during spring 1976. Experience soon revealed 
that whenever a collar of this type was broken by a coyote, one or both of the uppermost packets were 
broken. Therefore the bottom packet on each side was deleted, reducing the total number of packets to 
two. During field tests in 1976, sixteen lambs with 4-packet collars and 33 lambs with 2-packet collars 
were attacked by coyotes; 11 (69%) of the 4-packet collars and 24 (73%) of the 2-packet models were 
punctured. 

While field tests with these 4-packet and 2-packet collars were in progress, laboratory work to 
improve the collar configuration continued.  A single, under-the-neck unit (Figure 4) is now believed 
to be superior to the under-ear models, although it has not yet been tested extensively in the field. 
This model contains two toxicant reservoirs of 20-25 ml each and can be made of either 20-mil (0.020 
inches thick) PVC or rubber. On current rubber models the side exposed to coyotes is approximately 
0.030-0.050 inches thick. The rubber units are more expensive than PVC, in prototype at least, but 
may be more acceptable to coyotes and more effective in delivering toxicants. Both rubber and PVC are 
chemically incompatible with many toxic formulations, although they appear to be equally suitable for 
use with 1080 in water. 

 

 

Figure 3.  The 4-packet toxic collar tested with 
diphacinone in 1976. Only 2 of the 4 
packets are visible in this photograph. 
USFWS photo by G.E. Connolly. 

 
Figure 4.  The current model of the toxic collar 

is made of black PVC or rubber.  It 
contains 40 to 50 ml of toxicant. USFWS 
photo by G.E. Connolly. 

In conjunction with our efforts to improve the toxic collar device, warning labels were also 
improved. We tested many kinds of gummed labels, along with various inks and rubber stamps, and found 
labels that adhere well to both the PVC and rubber collars.  Each collar in the field bears one or 
more pre-printed warning labels with skull and crossbones, the identity of the toxicant, and the 
address and telephone number of the DWRC.  Warning signs are also posted at each logical point of 
entry to our test areas.      

201 



FIELD TESTS OF THE DIPHACINONE COLLAR 

In early 1976, diphacinone and 1080 were the only available toxicants that appeared to be 
feasible for use in the toxic collar. At that time, 1080 was not a viable option but diphacinone 
was. In particular, diphacinone was non-repellent, highly toxic to coyotes (oral LD50 = about 0.6 
mg/kg), had a readily available and effective antidote (vitamin K1), and was safe for use under field 
conditions. Consequently, we used it in the toxic collar from March through October 1976. All of the 
tests took place in western Montana, with the Eight Mile ranch of L.W. Cook, near Florence, as the 
main test site. The history of coyote predation on this ranch has been well documented (Henne, 1977; 
Brawley, 1977). 

The diphacinone formulation used in these tests was an aqueous suspension (50 mg/ml) manufactured 
by Motomco, Inc., Clark, NJ, for vampire bat control in Latin America. This material was loaded into 
the collar packets with a hypodermic syringe. As in the NaCN collar tests, each cooperating rancher 
agreed to withhold other means of predator control during the test, and was reimbursed at market value 
for predator kills verified by us.  Since the tethered lamb procedure had been ineffective with the 
NaCN collars, the diphacinone collars were placed on free-ranging lambs. Again it was not feasible to 
collar every lamb, so special tactics were needed to induce coyote attacks on the collared ones. The 
approaches used in these tests were: 

(1) Small groups (up to 10) of collared lambs were placed in pastures 2 to 3 weeks before the 
arrival of the main flocks, with the object of killing the problem coyotes before larger flocks of 
uncollared sheep were exposed to predation. 

(2) When coyotes were traveling through a vacant pasture to kill sheep in an adjacent pasture, 
we put collared sheep in the vacant pasture to intercept or attract the coyote en route to the main 
band. 

(3) Flocks in which kills were occurring regularly were moved to a different pasture, and a small 
flock of collared sheep was left behind. 

(4) The main flocks were corralled at night, while collared sheep were left out in the pastures. 
Two series of field tests were made with diphacinone collars. The first tests, during March-June 

1976, were limited to the Eight Mile ranch where chronic and serious coyote depredations were being 
documented by Brawley (1977) of the Montana Cooperative Wildlife Research Unit under contract to the 
DWRC. When these tests began in mid-March the ranch sheep were in the lambing barns, so that only 
collared lambs were available to coyotes.  Fifteen lambs were killed between March 23 and April 16, 
and 10 of the 15 collars were broken. An unknown number of coyotes was killed. Because of the delayed 
action of diphacinone we did not expect to recover the dead coyotes; however, K. Brawley found the 
fresh carcass of one poisoned coyote. A domestic dog that killed a collared sheep was also recovered 
after it died at the office of a local veterinarian. 

One of the ranch flocks went to the field on April 24 and a second flock entered another pasture 
on May 4. In spite of our previous success in inducing coyote attacks on collared sheep, and presumably 
in killing some of the attacking coyotes, heavy predation ensued in the large, uncollared flocks. Of 
106 coyote kills documented in May, only 4 were collared lambs. The coyotes ignored the small, target 
flocks but killed lambs almost every night in the larger herds.  It appeared that coyote attacks on 
the collared lambs could be assured only if the main flocks were removed or somehow protected from 
coyotes. At the same time the effectiveness of the collar was obscured by the time delay (5-16 days) 
between dosing and death of the attacking coyotes. Pen studies at Logan had shown that coyotes would 
continue to kill sheep for 4 or 5 days after they received a lethal dose of diphacinone from a toxic 
collar. On the Eight Mile ranch, therefore, we could not determine whether continuing predation after 
an attack on a collared lamb was attributable to poisoned coyotes that had not yet died, or whether 
different coyotes were involved. 

The best course of action at this point would have been to switch to a faster-acting toxicant. 
However, the only known alternative to diphacinone was 1080 and we were not yet permitted to use this 
compound. Therefore the tests were moved to smaller ranches where protective management of the farm 
flocks was easier. 

In the second series of field tests with diphacinone collars (Table 2), 15 trials were made in 
14 pastures ranging from 5 to 300 acres (2-121 hectares) in size. The test sites were selected on the 
basis of damage complaints received by Jerry Lewis, District Field Assistant in the ADC Program. In 
every case but one (Ranch #6) the farm flock was moved or protected while the collared sheep were in 
place. On Ranch #6, circumstances dictated that the collared sheep should be tethered at strategic 
points, and tethering was successful in this instance. 

To facilitate analysis of test results (Table 2), we show the dates of collar placement and coyote 
attacks on collared and uncollared sheep in reference to Day 0, when collars were first placed in the 
field. The figures for Ranch #1, for example, indicate that a ranch sheep (uncollared) was killed 2 
days before the start of the test.  Collars were in the field for 5 nights and one collar was broken 
by an attacking coyote on the 5th night. On the 6th day of the test (Day 5), the collars were removed 
and the ranch flock returned to the pasture.  A ranch sheep was killed on Day 14, so the collars were 
put out again on Day 24. The test was stopped on Day 36 and there were no further coyote kills through 

202 



Table 2.  Summary of field tests in Montana, June-October 1976, of toxic collars containing 5% 
diphacinone. 

1Counting from Day 0, when toxic collars were placed on the ranch. Day -2 is two days before collars 
were placed.  

2Three collars were broken. 
3Ranch flock was corralled each night because of earlier predation. 
4Four collars were broken. 
5Collared lambs were tethered. 
6Eight collars were broken. One broken collar was missing, as was an unbroken collar from another 
collared sheep killed. Two decaying coyote carcasses were found on a neighboring ranch on day 57. 
7Twenty-one lambs were killed in the 20 days just before the test. 
8Several coyotes were shot or taken with M-44's during these tests.  Therefore the subsequent pattern 
of predation cannot be interpreted solely in terms of the toxic collar,  
9Not recorded. 
10The entire target flock (6 large lambs) was chased out of the pasture by attacking coyotes. Four were   
killed and 3 collars were recovered (2 had been broken). The other 2 sheep were never found. 
11Rancher attributed the lack of kills during days 10-37 to removal of over 100 coyotes from the area        
by ADC personnel. He also sold his lambs and corralled his ewes each night. 
12Two collared lambs were attacked but neither collar was broken.  
13Sheep were not returned to the high risk pasture. 
14Four coyotes taken by helicopter on day 8. 
15Four coyotes shot by rancher during test. 

at least Day 129. In this case the coyote that broke the collar on Day 4 could have been poisoned and 
yet made the kill on Day 14 before succumbing to the toxicant. Unfortunately, this interpretation of 
the observed results must remain speculative.     

203 



In Table 2, the tests are arranged in three groups, depending on their outcome. Group I consists 
of those ranches where losses of sheep to coyotes stopped or were reduced after coyotes broke toxic 
collars. In these 8 cases the problem coyotes may have been killed by the toxicant in the collars. 
Group II includes two ranches where toxic collars also were broken by attacking coyotes, but these tests 
were confounded by other forms of predator control while toxic collars were in the field. In the 
remaining 5 tests (Group III) no toxic collars were punctured and therefore the use of the collar could 
not have influenced the subsequent pattern of predation. 

The results of these tests illustrate the difficulty of determining with certainty whether coyote 
predation was stopped through use of the toxic collar. Even though some problem coyotes may have been 
killed in 10 of the 15 tests and predation subsequently was lower than it had been before the tests, 
in no case can we be certain that the coyotes were killed. The evaluation problem is particularly 
difficult with diphacinone because of its slow action. But even with a faster-acting toxicant such as 
1080, many unknown and uncontrollable variables will continue to influence the tests. If coyote 
predation continued after one or more collars had been punctured by a coyote, one could conclude that 
the collar failed to stop losses in that case. But if the losses stopped it usually would not be 
possible to attribute this result positively to the collar. The coyotes might have been shot by a 
neighbor or frightened away by unusual human activities associated with the test. During the field 
work with NaCN, for example, we found that predation dropped substantially during the field tests even 
though no coyotes were killed. The most likely explanation is that the coyotes were sensitive to 
increased human presence and changed their habits to avoid the test areas. 

These evaluation problems are by no means peculiar to the toxic collar; they apply in some measure 
to every predator control technique, whether operational or experimental, lethal or non-lethal.  
Because of the intractable variables and expense involved, these problems are all but impossible to 
resolve by experimental design. Our approach to this problem, as far as the toxic collar is concerned, 
is simply to conduct as many tests as possible on sites with the greatest possible rate of predation, 
while withholding other forms of predator control to the best of our ability. But we must accept the 
fact that the tests will be influenced by many factors beyond our control. 

SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS 

As with any toxic device, the use of the toxic collar entails certain hazards, not only to the 
human user but to other persons who may contact the collars through chance or ignorance. We are 
attempting to minimize these risks through careful control of the collars and collared sheep, warning 
labels on the collars, warning signs around the test areas, and notification of hospitals near test 
areas.  In addition to the human hazards, there is the possibility of secondary poisoning of non-
target wildlife species that scavenge upon the carcasses of the collared lambs or poisoned coyotes.  
In our judgment these risks are minimal with the current toxic collars as used with 1080.  The model 
to be field-tested in 1978 (Figure 4) contains approximately 3 to 8 human LD50s of 1080, compared 
with 650 to 1300 LD50s of NaCN in the collar that was used in 1975 (Figure 2). Still it must be 
acknowledged that toxic collars can be lost in the field.  Eight toxic collars or parts of collars 
were lost during the field tests with diphacinone. Such losses are unavoidable; they usually occurred 
when the collared lambs were killed and eaten, scattered, or carried off by coyotes.  One lost collar 
was later found intact approximately one-half mile away from and 2 1/2 months after the kill. 

In addition to the possibility of lost collars, several other collars were ruptured accidentally 
when the target sheep ran into or through fences.  Coyotes also broke the collars on 6 lambs that 
were attacked but not killed.  These "walking wounded" lambs with leaking collars present special risks 
to anyone who might handle the lambs without being aware of the hazard involved. It is noteworthy 
that the firms supplying our prototype collars have expressed concern over the product liability aspects 
of collar manufacture, even though they would not logically be held liable for incidents resulting 
from our uses of the collar in research. 

OUTLOOK AND FUTURE PROSPECTS 

The work to date has shown that sheep-killing coyotes can be killed selectively with toxicant-
filled, sheep neck collars. The outstanding advantage of this method is its selectivity for coyotes 
that attack sheep. The collar may be effective against coyotes that have eluded other means of control. 
The known disadvantages include the need to sacrifice lambs to the offending coyotes, hazards associated 
with the use of toxicants under field conditions, and the expense of collaring and managing the target 
lambs as well as removing or otherwise protecting uncollared sheep in the problem area. 

We believe that the toxic collar will be most useful where depredations are frequent and regular. 
Where predation is infrequent and unpredictable, as is often the case, one would have to keep collared 
sheep in position for several days or even weeks before coyotes attacked them.  A major obstacle in 
our field work, in fact, has been the difficulty of finding test sites where the incidence of predation 
was sufficiently high to make a test feasible. In the latest diphacinone tests (Table 2), the lapsed 
time from placement of collared lambs to puncture of the first collar ranged from one to 23 days with 
an average of 10 days.  From an operational standpoint, however, the collar will be most useful where 
an attack can be obtained in one or two days. It remains to be seen how many actual damage cases will 
meet this criterion.    

                                           204 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This paper is the product of a large research project that involved many cooperators both inside 
and outside of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. It is not possible here to acknowledge all who 
contributed to the work, but thanks are due to L.W. Cook and the other ranchers who allowed the use 
of their flocks and pastures in this research. R.E. Severson deserves special recognition for his 
pioneering work on target lamb concepts and for his role in the North Dakota tests of the NaCN collar. 
Significant parts of the field and laboratory work were also done by D. Bauer, D. Beaudin, K. Brawley, 
R. Bullard, G. Dasch, D. Elias, M. Garrison, D. Johannsen, B. Johns, M. Jones, G. Larson, S. Montgomery, 
R. Munoz, I. Okuno, M. Popelka, G. Roberts, R.T. Sterner, M. Sweeny, and F. Turkowski. The support, 
advice and collaboration of W.L. Pfeifer, J. Lewis and other ADC personnel of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service in North Dakota, Montana, Idaho, and Texas is acknowledged along with that of D.S. Balser, 
S.B. Linhart, R.T. McBride, R.D. Thompson, and R. Reese. To these colleagues and many others we extend 
our appreciation. This research was supported in part by the EPA under Agreement No. IAG-D6-0910 and 
has been described in two unpublished progress reports to that agency (Connolly et al., 1976b; Connolly, 
1976). The field tests with NaCN were covered by EPA Experimental Use Permit No. 6704-EUP-6. 

LITERATURE CITED 

BRAWLEY, K.C.  1977.  Domestic sheep mortality during and after tests of several predator control 
methods.  M.S. Thesis, Univ. Montana, Missoula.  69p. 

CONNOLLY, G.  1976.  Field tests of diphacinone in the toxic collar for selective control of sheep-
killing coyotes.  Supplement to Final Progress Rept., Environmental Protection Agency, Agreement 
No. IAG-D6-0910.  U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, DWRC, Denver, CO.  23p. 

CONNOLLY, G.E., R.M. TIMM, W.E. HOWARD, and W.M. LONGHURST.  1976a.  Sheep-killing behavior of captive 
coyotes.  J. Wildl. Manage. 40(3):400-407. 

             ., R. STERNER, P. SAVARIE, R. GRIFFITH, D. ELIAS, M. GARRISON, B. JOHNS, and I. OKUNO. 
1976b.  The toxic collar for selective control of sheep-killing coyotes.  Final Prog. Rept., 
Environmental Protection Agency, Agreement No. IAG-D6-0910.  U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, 
DWRC, Denver, CO.  119p + 13 plates. 

DUNCOMBE, J.  1920.  Sheep protector and coyote exterminator.  U.S. Patent No. 1,349,665, registered 
U.S. Patent Office, Washington, D.C. 

HENNE, D.R.  1977.  Domestic sheep mortality on a western Montana ranch.  pp. 133-146 In:  Phillips, 
R.L. and C. Jonkel (Eds.).  Proceedings of the 1975 Predator Symposium.  For. & Cons. Expt. Sta., 
Univ. Montana, Missoula.  268p. 

MATHENY, R.W.  1976.  Review and results of sodium cyanide spring loaded ejector mechanism (SCSLEM) 
experimental programs.  Proc. Vertebrate Pest Conf. 7:161-177. 

NASS, R.D.  1977.  Mortality associated with sheep operations in Idaho.  J. Range Manage. 30(4):253-258. 

MC BRIDE, R.T.  1974.  Predator protection collar for livestock.  U.S. Patent No. 3,842,806.  Registered, 
U.S. Patent Office, Washington, D.C. 

SAVARIE, P.J. and R.T. STERNER.  1977.  Preliminary evaluations of toxic collars for selective control 
of coyotes that attack sheep.  Unpubl. ms.  Denver Wildlife Res. Center, Denver, Colorado. 

205 

kpowell2
Line

kpowell2
Line

kpowell2
Line


	University of Nebraska - Lincoln
	DigitalCommons@University of Nebraska - Lincoln
	3-1-1978

	TOXIC COLLAR FOR CONTROL OF SHEEP-KILLING COYOTES: A PROGRESS REPORT
	Guy E. Connolly
	Richard E. Griffiths Jr.
	Peter J. Savarie


