data\Davidson-Nelson & Gehring, 2010.pdfaccess_permission:can_modify: true
access_permission:extract_content: true
xmpMM:DocumentID: uuid:7a2e563e-714a-42b3-9469-ee3c163dce2d
producer: Acrobat Distiller 8.2.0 (Macintosh)
Author: philipparisi
dc:title: HWC_4.1.indb
meta:save-date: 2010-03-24T22:26:15Z
Last-Modified: 2010-03-24T22:26:15Z
xmp:CreatorTool: Adobe InDesign CS3 (5.0.4)
dcterms:created: 2010-03-24T22:25:42Z
access_permission:can_print: true
meta:author: philipparisi
X-Parsed-By: 
org.apache.tika.parser.DefaultParser
org.apache.tika.parser.pdf.PDFParser
pdf:docinfo:creator: philipparisi
access_permission:extract_for_accessibility: true
access_permission:fill_in_form: true
pdf:encrypted: false
pdf:docinfo:producer: Acrobat Distiller 8.2.0 (Macintosh)
creator: philipparisi
dc:format: application/pdf; version=1.6
access_permission:can_print_degraded: true
Creation-Date: 2010-03-24T22:25:42Z
pdf:docinfo:creator_tool: Adobe InDesign CS3 (5.0.4)
pdf:docinfo:modified: 2010-03-24T22:26:15Z
access_permission:assemble_document: true
pdf:docinfo:created: 2010-03-24T22:25:42Z
Last-Save-Date: 2010-03-24T22:26:15Z
X-TIKA:parse_time_millis: 121
date: 2010-03-24T22:26:15Z
pdf:docinfo:title: HWC_4.1.indb
created: Wed Mar 24 15:25:42 PDT 2010
dc:creator: philipparisi
modified: 2010-03-24T22:26:15Z
meta:creation-date: 2010-03-24T22:25:42Z
access_permission:modify_annotations: true
pdf:PDFVersion: 1.6
xmpTPg:NPages: 8
title: HWC_4.1.indb
dcterms:modified: 2010-03-24T22:26:15Z
Content-Type: application/pdf
!PDF_CONTENT!
--------------------------------









































HWC_4.1.indb


Human–Wildlife Interactions 4(1):87–94, Spring 2010

Testing fl adry as a nonlethal management 
tool for wolves and coyotes in Michigan
SARAH J. DAVIDSON-NELSON,1 Department of Biology, Central Michigan University, Mount 

Pleasant, MI 48859, USA
THOMAS M. GEHRING, Department of Biology, Central Michigan University, Mount Pleasant, MI 

48859, USA    gehri1tm@cmich.edu

Abstract: Several forms of nonlethal management exist, but fi eld testing is problematic, and 
few such techniques have been tested on free-ranging wolves (Canis lupus) or other predators. 
We tested fl adry in the eastern Upper Peninsula of Michigan during the summers of 2004 and 
2005 on treatment farms and control farms. Wolf visitation inside pastures, compared to those 
outside pastures, was less on fl adry-protected farms (U = 45, n = 7, P = 0.004); whereas, 
we found no difference in wolf visitation inside and outside of pastures on control farms (U 
= 30, n = 7, P = 0.24). We found no difference in coyote (Canis latrans) visitation inside and 
outside of pastures on both treatment (U = 29.5, n = 7, P = 0.26) and control farms (U = 31.5, 
n = 7, P = 0.19). In our study, fl adry deterred wolves from using livestock areas. Fladry was 
not effective for coyotes. Fladry may provide livestock owners and management agencies 
a temporarily effective, nonlethal management tool for reducing wolf-caused depredation of 
livestock; however, labor and equipment costs can be substantial.

Key words: Canis latrans, Canis lupus, coyote, fl adry, human–wildlife confl icts, livestock 
depredation, nonlethal control, Upper Peninsula of Michigan

1Present address:  St. Clair County RESA, Pine River Nature Center, 2585 Castor Road, Goodells, 
MI 48027, USA

As gray wolves (Canis lupus) recolonize 
agricultural landscapes, wolf–human confl icts, 
such as livestock depredations, may increase 
(Mech 1995, Harper et al. 2005).  Livestock 
depredations can lead to greater animosity 
toward wolves among farmers and other 
rural stakeholder groups (Fritt s et al. 2003). If 
public social tolerance for wolf depredations 
decreases, the number of wolves killed illegally 
may increase (Mech 1995). Thus, it is important 
that management practices be developed and 
tested to reduce depredations and mitigate the 
risk of public att itudes toward wolves shift ing 
from favorable to unfavorable (Mech 1995). The 
goals of all control tools are to provide safe, 
economically feasible, species-specifi c, and 
effi  cient methods that reduce the depredation 
problem for the longest period of time possible 
(Berryman 1972).  

Managers have largely resorted to killing 
predators in the hopes of eliminating problem 
animals and reducing future confl icts between 
management agencies and livestock producers 
(Musiani et al. 2005). Public opinion favors the 
use of nonlethal management tools over lethal 
control (Reiter et al. 1999). Although nonlethal 
management options exist, few have been the 

subject of a controlled experiment involving 
free-ranging wolves or other predators. Partly, 
this has been due to the diffi  culty in conducting 
large-scale experiments while controlling for 
confounding variables (Breck 2004).

One possible nonlethal management tool 
is fl adry. Fladry consists of fl ags that hang 
from a rope line. Fladry has been used for 
centuries in Eastern Europe and Russia as 
a method for hunting wolves  (Okarma and 
Jedrzejewski 1997). Musiani and Visalberghi 
(2001) tested fl adry on captive wolves and 
indicated that it confi ned wolf movements for 
short periods of time (i.e., 30 minutes). Musiani 
et al. (2003) conducted the fi rst fi eld trials of 
fl adry on livestock operations and indicated its 
eff ectiveness for preventing wolf use of areas 
for at least 60 days.    

Our objective was to use a controlled 
experiment to determine whether fl adry 
could successfully reduce visitations by free-
ranging wolves and coyotes (Canis latrans) 
into livestock pastures and, thereby, reduce 
livestock depredations throughout a growing 
season. We hypothesized that fl adry would 
act as a visual barrier that wolves and coyotes 
would not cross.  We predicted that visitation 



88 Human–Wildlife Interactions 4(1)

into pastures and depredations by wolves and 
coyotes on farms containing fl adry would be 
lower than on the adjacent control farms (i.e., 
farms without fl adry).  

Methods
Study area

We conducted research in the eastern 
Upper Peninsula of Michigan, near Rudyard 
and Pickford in Mackinaw and Chippewa 
counties, during the summers of 2004 and 
2005.  The study area consisted of a mixture 
of northern hardwoods, lowland conifers, 
streams, grasslands, agricultural areas, and 
rivers. Agriculture included sheep, catt le, and 
horse operations, as well as crops (primarily 
oat, alfalfa, and wheat). During this study, the 
Upper Peninsula contained approximately 
425 wolves within an estimated total of 87 
wolf packs, as well as coyotes interspersed 
within the landscape (D. E. Beyer, Michigan 
Department of Natural Resources [MDNR], 
personal communication). 

We selected catt le and sheep farms within 
the study area based on their location within 
the study area, habitat, livestock in pasture, 
past depredation history, and the willingness of 
farmers to participate in the study. We initially 
used MDNR winter track and radio telemetry 
data to identify likely study locations where 
wolves and farms overlapped. These areas 
were locations where MDNR had monitored 
radio-collared wolf packs within 2 years of this 
study. We also conducted track 
and scat surveys along dirt roads, 
2-tracks, and on farms within these 
areas during late winter to early 
summer to confi rm the presence 
of wolves within 5 km of potential 
study farms. We conducted track 
surveys a minimum of 3 times to 
confi rm wolf presence (Wydeven 
et al. 1995). Of the 8 farms selected, 
4 sheep farms ( = number of 
sheep = 625, SE = 75) were located 
in Chippewa County and 4 catt le 
farms (  = number of catt le = 64, 
SE = 2) were located in Mackinaw 
County. Average size of farms was 
169 ha (SE = 19 ha). During 2003, 
approximately equal numbers of 
sheep (1,800 head) and catt le (2,200 

head) occurred in the study area (Michigan 
Department of Agriculture 2003). We assumed 
that both farm types were equally accessible to 
wolves and coyotes. Further, all farm pastures 
were confi rmed to be used by coyotes and 
wolves, based on track surveys we conducted 
before the experimentation began.  

All farms had existing electrifi ed livestock 
fencing used to maintain sheep or catt le within 
pastures (i.e., no farms had predator-proof 
fencing). Sheep farms had 5-strand, high-tensile 
fencing with 2 electrifi ed wires (located 30 cm 
and 65 cm above ground level). Catt le farms had 
3-strand high-tensile fencing with 2 electrifi ed 
strands (located 40 cm and 65 cm from ground 
level). Fences were 115 cm high at the top wire, 
which was not electrifi ed. The bott om wire 
(not electrifi ed) on fences was 22 cm and 30 cm 
above ground level for sheep and catt le farms, 
respectively. Two of the 4 catt le farms also 
had a mid-level, nonelectrifi ed barbed wire. 
All farms had open, grass pastures that were 
surrounded at least on 1 side by forest. All the 
farms had active livestock disposal sites. These 
carcass dumps were created in spring and early 
summer (primarily during lambing or calving) 
and were all located outside the livestock 
pastures within 50 m of the perimeter of the 
livestock fencing. Further, 5 of the 8 farms (i.e., 
2 catt le and 3 sheep) had MDNR-documented 
coyote or wolf depredations,  and 1 catt le farm 
had documented att acks within 2 years of this 
study. Farmers of the 2 remaining farms without 

Figure 1. Fladry (foreground in photo) was hung outside of exist-
ing livestock fencing at the study site in the eastern Upper Penin-
sula of Michigan. Livestock fencing was present at both fl adry and 
control farms during 2004 to 2005.  



89Testing fl adry • Davidson-Nelson and Gehring

past verifi ed depredations claimed to have lost 
livestock (i.e., livestock were missing) to coyotes 
or wolves within the previous 2 years; however, 
none of those losses was confi rmed by MDNR. 

Blocking by livestock type, we randomly 
assigned 2 sheep and 2 catt le farms as treatment 
(fl adry) sites and 2 sheep and 2 catt le farms 
as control sites. Fladry and control farms 
were located within 3 km of each other to 
ensure that wolves and coyotes within the 
area had equal access to both farm types.  

Fladry
We placed fl adry on the farms at the beginning 

of May and monitored the farms mid-May 
through mid-August (75 days). These months 
were the period of greatest predation risk, due 
to the onset of the lambing and calving season 
when young livestock were most vulnerable 
(Fritt s et al. 1992). We used fl adry with 8-cm-
wide red fl ags made of rip-stop nylon. The fl ags 
were 46 cm long and spaced every 46 cm on the 
line. Fladry lines were always placed outside 
the livestock fencing (Figure 1). To install the 
fl adry material, we fi rst installed electric rebar 
posts (6.35 mm in diameter) on the outside of 
the existing livestock fence. Rebar posts were 
spaced 7 to 9 m apart and approximately 0.5 
m away from the existing fence. This spacing 
and placement of the rebar posts ensured that 
the fl adry line remained consistent and taut; it 
also prevented the fl adry line from entangling 
itself around the existing fencing material. This 
confi guration of the fl adry line allowed the 
voltage of the livestock electric fence to remain 
constant and prevented damage to the fl adry 
and injury to the livestock (i.e., livestock could 
not chew or consume the fl ags). The rebar posts 
ran the length of the entire perimeter of the 
fence and were equipped with plastic fencing 
insulators for att aching fl adry line to rebar 
posts. Fladry was then strung through the 
insulators and positioned so that the bott om 
of the individual fl ags was approximately 0.1 
m above ground level. We monitored fl adry 
lines every 3 or 4 days to ensure that fl ags were 
present and not damaged. We replaced missing 
or damaged fl ags with new ones. During each 
day of our scent station survey (see below), 
we checked the fl adry lines to ensure that they 
were still hanging intact. During October, the 
fl adry was removed and stored for the winter. 

The rebar posts and insulators stayed intact to 
be used the following summer.  

Predator visitation
We used scent stations to monitor the use of 

each farm by wolves and coyotes. We constructed 
scent stations (1.5-m diameter) by using a line 
trimmer to remove vegetation and then added 
sift ed sand (Roughton and Sweeney 1982). We 
baited stations in the center with sheep or catt le 
feces from the farm to act as a mild att ractant. 
This type of bait was not considered to be a food-
based lure due to the scent of the feces being 
continuously around the farm and surrounding 
area. We chose to use feces because a stronger 
lure could att ract a wolf or coyote from great 
distances, and we did not want the animal to 
be att racted to the smell of the lure, but to the 
area itself. We placed scent stations  around the 
inside and outside perimeter of the pastures as 
pairs on both the control and fl adry farms and 
then monitored concurrently. We positioned 
pairs of scent stations directly across from one 
another, with the livestock fence and fl adry line 
in the middle. One station was directly inside 
the livestock fencing, and the other station was 
positioned outside, 0.55 m from the livestock 
fence (i.e., directly outside the fl adry line on 
treatment farms).  We placed paired scent 
stations approximately every 200 m from each 
other around the perimeter of the farm.   

We conducted the scent station surveys for 5 
days each week during mid-May through mid-
August for both fi eld seasons, totaling 75 days of 
sampling. We checked stations daily to look for 
and recorded the presence of wolf and coyote 
tracks. We used track dimensions and shape 
characteristics to diff erentiate these species. 
We chose to determine the diff erence between 
species by both comparing the diff erences in 
track size and using a cut-off  point of 9.0 cm 
in length and 7.0 cm in width (Halfpenny and 
Bruchac 2001). The presence of wolf or coyote 
track(s) in any of the scent stations at a farm 
constituted 1 visit, classifi ed as inside or outside 
the pasture.

We used a Mann-Whitney U-test (1-tailed 
test) to compare wolf or coyote visitation inside 
the pasture and outside the pasture on fl adry 
farms and control farms. Given our research 
design, we assumed farms were independent 
from each other across the 2 years of the study, 



90 Human–Wildlife Interactions 4(1)

and we treated farm-year as our experimental 
unit. For each farm-year, we averaged wolf and 
coyote visits inside and outside pastures during 
the monitoring period and conducted Mann-
Whitney U-tests for fl adry (n = 7) and control (n = 
7) farms. We used a signifi cance level of α = 0.05.

Wolf and coyote depredations
We monitored depredations of livestock on 

fl adry and control farms during the summer 
fi eld seasons. The owners of the farms counted 
their animals to ensure that no livestock 
was missing and looked for dead livestock. 
If a depredation did occur, the livestock 
producer was asked to contact the MDNR 
and U.S. Department of Agriculture Animal 
and Plant Health Inspection Services Wildlife 
Division, hereaft er WS. Investigators from 
WS determined the cause of livestock death. 

Time requirement and cost of fl adry
We calculated the process of installing fl adry 

in person-hours for 1 individual. We broke 
down the process into 4 steps and quantifi ed 
the installation time for each step, including 
(1) installation of rebar posts, (2) installation of 
insulators on the rebar posts, (3) installation of 
fl adry on the insulators, and (4) monitoring the 
fl adry. We calculated the amount of time for each 
step from the 2004 summer fi eld season, which 
included a group of 8 individuals working to 
place a single fl adry fence around the entire 4.8-
km perimeter of an approximately 150-ha farm. 
Labor costs were calculated at a rate of $8 per 
hour. The 2004 fi eld season was the fi rst time 
anyone in the group had placed fl adry on a farm. 
We chose to use the information from the 2004 
fi eld season because it would be a more accurate 
representation of the true time commitment 
for a livestock producer using fl adry for the 
fi rst time. Therefore, these values should be 
considered conservative. We purchased fl adry 
from Carol’s Custom Creations (Arco, Id.) in 
400-m segments. We determined the cost of 
rebar posts and insulators throughout the study 
periods of 2004 and 2005. We used livestock 
market prices in Michigan (United Producer’s 
Inc.) to estimate the number of depredations 
that farmers would need to experience to equal 
the costs of fl adry. We estimated fall market 
weights of catt le (  = 284 kg) at an average 
price of $1.43 per kg. We estimated fall market 

weights of lambs (  = 57 kg) at an average price 
of $2.09 per kg.     

Results
Predator visitation

We observed an average of 0.29 wolf visits 
inside pastures and 1.43 wolf visits outside 
pastures and an average of 0.43 coyote visits 
inside pastures and 0.71 visits outside pastures 
on fl adry farms. We observed an average of 0.71 
wolf visits inside pastures and 0.29 wolf visits 
outside pastures and an average of 0 coyote visits 
inside pastures and 0.29 visits outside pastures 
on control farms. We observed both of the wolf 
visits inside fl adry-protected pastures when 
the fl adry barrier was not properly installed or 
maintained. The fi rst time this happened, calves 
had escaped the pasture and pulled the fl adry 
fence down for approximately 200 m. Track 
evidence indicated that several wolves entered 
the pasture at this specifi c site. The second time 
it happened because a livestock producer failed 
to re-att ach a 3-m-long fl adry gate aft er he had 
been in the pasture. We found 1 set of wolf tracks 
entering this pasture at the gate. These 2 wolf 
trespasses occurred 21 and 26 days aft er fl adry 
was established, respectively. We included the 2 
wolf visits into pastures in our analysis, despite 
the compromised integrity of the fl adry at those 
times. 

Wolf visitations inside pastures compared 
to those outside pastures were less on fl adry-
protected farms (U = 45, n = 7, P = 0.004), 
whereas, we found no diff erence in wolf 
visitations both  inside and outside pastures 
on control farms (U = 30, n = 7, P = 0.24). We 
found no diff erence in coyote visitations inside 
and outside pastures on treatment (U = 29.5, 
n = 7, P = 0.26) and control farms (U = 31.5, n 
= 7, P = 0.18). Coyotes fi rst crossed the fl adry 
an average of 47 days (SE = 4 days) aft er fl adry 
establishment. We also received observations 
from the general public of 2 accounts, each on 
separate farms, of large canids investigating the 
fl adry, walking parallel to it, and then returning 
in the direction they came from aft er they 
unsuccessfully att empted to cross the fl adry.  
  
Wolf and coyote depredation

During the 2004 fi eld season, there were no 
wolf or coyote depredations on either fl adry or 
control farms. During the 2005 fi eld season, there 



91Testing fl adry • Davidson-Nelson and Gehring

were no wolf depredations on either fl adry or 
control farms, but we did document 8 verifi ed 
coyote depredations on 1 sheep farm with fl adry.  

Time requirement and cost of fl adry
The approximate time for 1 individual to 

equip a farm perimeter with rebar posts, 
insulators, and the fl adry line was 8.5 per 
hour per km, or $68 per km. One individual 
required 1.6 hour per km  ($12.80) per week 
for monitoring. Assuming a 14-week growing 
season, monitoring costs would be estimated 
at $179 per km. The total cost for fl adry was 
$588 per km per year, assuming that fl adry has 
a 3-year life. Rebar posts were estimated to be 
useable for approximately 6 years at a cost of 
approximately $40 per km per year. Insulators 
were estimated to cost $40 per km per year. The 
total costs to establish and maintain fl adry on a 
150-ha farm would be $4,392 per year. Annual 
depredation losses would have to exceed 37 
lambs or 11 calves to equal the approximate 
costs of using fl adry on a 150-ha farm. 

Discussion
Prior to this research, no controlled ex-

perimental assessment (i.e., with treatment 
and control farms) had been done on the use 
of fl adry as a nonlethal management method 
for free-ranging wolves or coyotes. We found 
a diff erence in wolf visitation inside pastures 
on fl adry-protected farms compared to control 
farms. Although there was some variation in 
fencing, all farms had electrifi ed 3 to 5 strands 
of wire with a total height of 115 cm. The top 
wire was not electrifi ed. Further, the bott om 
wire on all farms was not electrifi ed and was 
22 to 33 cm above ground level. As such, 
the livestock fencing was not designed to 
serve as predator-proof fencing and would 
not eff ectively prevent access by coyotes or 
wolves. Dorrance and Bourne (1980) reported 
that coyotes still penetrated a 7-strand electric 
fence, even though the bott om wire (15-cm 
above ground level) was electrifi ed. Coyotes 
and wolves also could likely access all of 
our pastures by jumping the 115-cm fence. 
For example, Gates et al. (1978) found that 
conventional sheep fence (111 cm high) was not 
eff ective at preventing coyotes from entering 
pastures. Only coyote-proof fencing (150 to 168 
cm high with 12 strands) reduced coyote access 

to pastures (Gates et al. 1978). Thus, before 
fl adry was placed, we suggest that all of our 
farms had an equal likelihood of access and use 
by wolves and coyotes.  

Fladry has been used to confi ne wild wolves 
overnight (Okarma and Jedrzejewski 1997). 
Musiani and Visalberghi (2001) used 2 groups 
of captive wolves and indicated that fl adry 
eff ectively confi ned wolf movements to certain 
areas for short periods (e.g., 30 minutes) and 
could possibly reduce depredations on livestock 
by  creating virtual barriers that wolves do 
not like to cross or that impair predation 
ability. Musiani et al. (2003) reported 15 of 18 
experiments were successful at preventing 
captive wolves from accessing food for 28 
hours. Musiani et al. (2003) also conducted bait 
station trials on free-ranging wolves around 
2 sites (100 m²) where wolves previously fed 
on wild ungulates. Fladry barriers prevented 
access by wolves to the baited sites for the 
duration of the experiment (i.e., 60 days). Field 
trials on livestock operations in both Alberta, 
Canada, and Idaho suggested that fl adry 
excluded wolves up to 60 days (Musiani et 
al. 2003). However, Shivik et al. (2003) found 
that fl adry did not eff ectively protect bait 
sites from scavengers, including wolves, bears 
(Ursus americanus), and bald eagles (Haliaeetus 
leucocephalus). Fladry also has been used in wolf 
depredation management scenarios (Bangs et 
al. 2006). Our study suggests that fl adry, if it is 
maintained, can exclude wolves from livestock 
pastures for up to 75 days. 

The long-term usefulness of fl adry as a 
nonlethal tool is unknown. Because fl adry is a 
neophobic device, wolves may eventually be-
come habituated to it (Musiani and Visalberghi 
2001; Musiani et al. 2003). The amount of time 
it takes wolves to become habituated is likely 
linked to the frequency of their visits to fl adry-
protected pastures. In our study, human scent 
around livestock pastures could have acted as a 
slight deterrent to wolves. We traversed weekly 
through areas typically unused by livestock 
owners, and we att empted to minimize this bias 
by visiting farms for the same amount of time 
and performing similar tasks at each farm. 

Okarma and Jedrzejewski (1997) suggested 
that fl adry was specifi c to wolves. Our visitation 
data for coyotes suggested that this might be 
true because we found no long-term exclusion 



92 Human–Wildlife Interactions 4(1)

of coyotes from fl adry-protected livestock 
pastures. Further, all coyote depredation 
occurred on 1 fl adry-protected farm. However, 
we do not believe that this fi nding suggests 
that the presence of fl adry increased coyote 
predation. We speculate that the gap between 
fl ags on standard fl adry may be too great rela-
tive to the size of a coyote and did not prevent 
them from accessing pastures. Additionally, 
coyotes might have visited livestock operations 
more frequently than wolves did, thereby 
making them acclimated to the fl adry (i.e., 
fl adry no longer was novel). Mett ler and Shivik 
(2007) found that captive coyotes exhibited 
a neophobic response to fl adry, required >12 
hours to become habituated, and dominant 
coyotes were less neophobic. Sacks et al. (1999) 
and Séquin et al. (2003) found that alpha 
(dominant) coyotes were more neophobic 
than subordinate coyotes, especially within 
their territories. Mett ler and Shivik (2007) 
suggested that an intensive predator control 
program may select for neophobic individuals 
via the continued trapping and removal of 
bold individuals. Coyotes in our study were 
not intensively trapped; rather, they were 
shot opportunistically by farmers. We did not 
identify the social status of wolves or coyotes in 
our study; however, we suspect that dominant 
individuals may have been present and may 
bave been less neophobic toward fl adry 
(Mett ler and Shivik 2007). Conversely, wolves 
may have been more neophobic and coyotes 
less neophobic if the fl adry farms were located 
inside or outside of their territories, respectively 
(Séquin et al. 2003).         

Depredations can be costly for individual 
producers, especially when a signifi cant 
number of depredations occurs in a single 
episode. The time it takes to equip a 150-ha 
farm with fl adry would be approximately 40.8 
man-hours, costing $326. Once rebar posts are 
set in the ground and insulators are att ached, 
the maintenance is on an as-needed basis. In 
a wolf management situation, fl adry could be 
a cost-eff ective mitigation tool for livestock 
depredations. However, wolves appear readily 
to survey the integrity of fl adry and access 
pastures where gaps occur. As such, the time 
commitment needed to ensure the fl adry line 
is intact may further reduce the application of 
this nonlethal tool. The lack of ability to predict 

when or where livestock depredations will 
occur is also an important factor in using fl adry 
and other preventative methods. For example, 
during the 2 years of our study, no depredations 
occurred on the control farms. These farmers 
would have wasted money, time, and eff ort by 
erecting a fl adry fence. Thus, it is important for 
farmers to gauge the risk of depredation with 
the cost and time commitments of using fl adry 
on their farms.

Management implications
Fladry was eff ective in deterring wolves from 

using livestock areas. Fladry was not eff ective for 
deterring coyotes. We suggest that  it is important 
to install fl adry independent and outside of 
existing livestock fencing. Fladry may provide 
livestock owners and management agencies a 
temporarily eff ective, nonlethal management 
tool for reducing wolf-caused depredation of 
livestock; however, labor and equipment costs 
can be substantial. Additional research should 
focus on the relationship between the frequency 
of visitation to fl adry-protected farms and the 
time it takes for wolves to become acclimated 
to it. Future research should also att empt to 
determine if modifi cations to standard fl adry 
can eff ectively exclude coyotes from sites. 

Acknowledgments
This study was funded by Central Michigan 

University (Research Excellence Fund Award), 
Central Michigan University College of 
Graduate Studies, Defenders of Wildlife, 
Michigan Department of Natural Resources–
Nongame Fund, the Humane Society of the 
United States, and CITGO Petroleum, Inc. We 
are grateful to all the farmers who participated 
in this study. We thank members of the Student 
Chapter of CMU-TWS, BIO 440 students, BIO 
541 students, and numerous volunteers for help 
with installing and dismantling the fl adry. We 
thank A. Nelson for valuable fi eld assistance 
throughout the project. 

Literature cited
Bangs, E., M. Jimenez, C. Niemeyer, J. Fontaine, 

M. Collinge, P. Krsichke, L. Handegard, J. Shi-
vik, C. Sime, S. Nadeau, C. Mack, D. Smith, 
V. Asher, and S. Stone. 2006. Nonlethal and 
lethal tools to manage wolf/livestock confl ict in 
the northwestern United States. Proceedings 
of the Vertebrate Pest Conference 22:7–16.



93Testing fl adry • Davidson-Nelson and Gehring

Berryman, J. H. 1972. The principles of preda-
tor control.  Journal of Wildlife Management 
6:395–400.

Breck S. W. 2004. Minimizing carnivore–livestock 
confl ict: the importance and process of re-
search in the search for coexistence. Pages 
13–27 in N. Fascione, A. Delach, and M. Smith, 
editors.  People and predators: from confl ict to 
coexistence. Island Press. Washington, D.C., 
USA.

Dorrance, M. J., and J. Bourne. 1980. An evalua-
tion of anti-coyote electric fencing. Journal of 
Range Management 33:385–387.

Fritts, S. H., W. J. Paul, L. D. Mech, and D. P. 
Scott. 1992. Trends and management of wolf–
livestock confl icts in Minnesota. U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service Resource Publication 181. 
Washington, D.C., USA.

Fritts, S. H., R. O. Stephenson, R. D. Hayes, and 
L. Boitani. 2003. Wolves and humans. Pages 
289–316 in L. D. Mech and L. Boitani, editors. 
Wolves: behavior, ecology, and conservation. 
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois, 
USA.

Gates, N. L., J. E. Rich, D. D. Godtel, and C. V. 
Hulet. 1978. Development and evaluation of 
anti-coyote electric fencing. Journal of Range 
Management 31:151–153.

Halfpenny, J. C., and J. Bruchac. 2001. Scat and 
tracks of the Northeast: a fi eld guide to the 
signs of seventy wildlife species. Falcon. Guil-
ford, Connecticut, USA.

Harper, E. K., W. J. Paul, and L. D. Mech. 2005. 
Causes of wolf depredation increase in Minne-
sota from 1979–1998. Wildlife Society Bulletin 
33:888–896.

Mech, L. D. 1995. The challenge and opportunity 
of recovering wolf populations. Conservation 
Biology 9:270–278.

Mettler, A. E., and J. A. Shivik. 2007. Dominance 
and neophobia in coyote (Canis latrans) breed-
ing pairs. Applied Animal Behaviour Science 
102:85–94.

Michigan Department of Agriculture. 2003. Michi-
gan Agricultural Statistics 2003–2004. Lansing, 
Michigan, USA.

Musiani, M., C. Mamo, L. Boitani, C. Callaghan, 
C. C. Gates, L. Mattei, E. Visalberghi, S. Breck, 
and G. Volpi. 2003. Wolf depredation trends 
and the use of fl adry barriers to protect live-
stock in western North America. Conservation 
Biology 17:1538–1552.

Musiani, M., T. Muhly, C. C. Gates, C. Callaghan, 
M. E. Smith, and E. Tosoni.  2005. Seasonality 
and reoccurrence of depredation and wolf con-
trol in western North America.  Wildlife Society 
Bulletin 33:876–887.

Musiani, M., and E. Visalberghi. 2001. Effective-
ness of fl adry on wolves in captivity. Wildlife 
Society Bulletin 29:91–98.

Okarma, H., and W. Jedrezejewski. 1997. Live-
trapping wolves with nets. Wildlife Society Bul-
letin 25:78–82.

Reiter, D. K., M. W. Brunson, and R. H. Schmidt. 
1999. Public attitudes toward wildlife damage 
management and policy. Wildlife Society Bul-
letin 27:746–758.

Roughton, R. D., and M. W. Sweeney. 1982. Re-
fi nements in scent-station methodology for as-
sessing trends in carnivore populations. Jour-
nal of Wildlife Management 46:217–229.

Sacks, B. N., M. M. Jaeger, J. C. C. Neale, and D. 
R. McCullough. 1999. Territoriality and breed-
ing status of coyotes relative to sheep preda-
tion. Journal of Wildlife Management 63:593–
605.

Séquin, E. S., M. M. Jaeger, P. F. Brussard, and 
R. H. Barrett. 2003. Wariness of coyotes to 
camera traps relative to social status and terri-
tory boundaries. Canadian Journal of Zoology 
81:2015–2025.

Shivik, J. A., A. Treves, and P. Callahan. 2003. 
Nonlethal techniques for managing predation: 
primary and secondary repellents. Conserva-
tion Biology 17:1531–1537.

Wydeven, A. P., R. N. Schultz, and R. P. Thiel. 
1995. Monitoring of a recovering gray wolf 
population in Wisconsin, 1979–1991. Pages 
147–156 in L. N. Carbyn, S. H. Fritts, and D. 
R. Seip, editors. Ecology and conservation 
of wolves in a changing world. Canadian Cir-
cumpolar Institute, occasional publication 35. 
University of Edmonton, Edmonton, Alberta, 
Canada.

 



94 Human–Wildlife Interactions 4(1)

SARAH J. DAVIDSON-NELSON is opera-
tions coordinator at the Pine River Nature Cen-
ter in Goodells, Michigan.  She obtained a B.S. 
degree in biology and an M.S. degree in conserva-
tion biology from Central Michigan University.  

THOMAS M. GEHRING is an associate 
professor of biology in the Department of Biol-
ogy at Central Michigan University. He obtained 
B.S. and M.S. degrees in biology and wildlife 
from the University of Wisconsin–Stevens Point 
and a Ph.D. degree in wildlife ecology at Purdue 
University.  His research interests are related to 
carnivore ecology and conservation. He teaches 
courses in ecology, wildlife biology and manage-
ment, mammalogy, and landscape ecology.


