data\Green, 1981.pdfaccess_permission:can_modify: true
access_permission:extract_content: true
producer: SPDF
Author: Jeffrey S. Green
dc:title: Reducing Coyote Damage To Sheep With Non-Lethal Techniques
meta:save-date: 2013-11-08T02:22:16Z
Last-Modified: 2013-11-08T02:22:16Z
xmp:CreatorTool: Appligent APSetDocInfo 2.2.2
dcterms:created: 2013-11-08T02:22:16Z
access_permission:can_print: true
meta:author: Jeffrey S. Green
pdf:docinfo:custom:Appligent: APSetDocInfo 2.2.2 Jan 16 2008
X-Parsed-By: 
org.apache.tika.parser.DefaultParser
org.apache.tika.parser.pdf.PDFParser
pdf:docinfo:creator: Jeffrey S. Green
access_permission:extract_for_accessibility: true
access_permission:fill_in_form: true
pdf:encrypted: false
pdf:docinfo:producer: SPDF
creator: Jeffrey S. Green
pdf:docinfo:custom:SPDF: 1122.1
dc:format: application/pdf; version=1.6
access_permission:can_print_degraded: true
Creation-Date: 2013-11-08T02:22:16Z
pdf:docinfo:creator_tool: Appligent APSetDocInfo 2.2.2
SPDF: 1122.1
pdf:docinfo:modified: 2013-11-08T02:22:16Z
access_permission:assemble_document: true
pdf:docinfo:created: 2013-11-08T02:22:16Z
Last-Save-Date: 2013-11-08T02:22:16Z
X-TIKA:parse_time_millis: 194
date: 2013-11-08T02:22:16Z
Appligent: APSetDocInfo 2.2.2 Jan 16 2008
pdf:docinfo:title: Reducing Coyote Damage To Sheep With Non-Lethal Techniques
created: Thu Nov 07 18:22:16 PST 2013
dc:creator: Jeffrey S. Green
modified: 2013-11-08T02:22:16Z
meta:creation-date: 2013-11-08T02:22:16Z
access_permission:modify_annotations: true
pdf:PDFVersion: 1.6
xmpTPg:NPages: 11
title: Reducing Coyote Damage To Sheep With Non-Lethal Techniques
dcterms:modified: 2013-11-08T02:22:16Z
Content-Type: application/pdf
!PDF_CONTENT!
--------------------------------












































Reducing Coyote Damage To Sheep With Non-Lethal Techniques


University of Nebraska - Lincoln
DigitalCommons@University of Nebraska - Lincoln
Great Plains Wildlife Damage Control Workshop
Proceedings Wildlife Damage Management, Internet Center for

10-15-1981

Reducing Coyote Damage To Sheep With Non-
Lethal Techniques
Jeffrey S. Green
USDA-ARS, U.S. Sheep Experiment Station, Dubois, Idaho

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/gpwdcwp
Part of the Environmental Health and Protection Commons

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Wildlife Damage Management, Internet Center for at DigitalCommons@University of
Nebraska - Lincoln. It has been accepted for inclusion in Great Plains Wildlife Damage Control Workshop Proceedings by an authorized administrator
of DigitalCommons@University of Nebraska - Lincoln.

Green, Jeffrey S., "Reducing Coyote Damage To Sheep With Non-Lethal Techniques" (1981). Great Plains Wildlife Damage Control
Workshop Proceedings. Paper 126.
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/gpwdcwp/126

http://digitalcommons.unl.edu?utm_source=digitalcommons.unl.edu%2Fgpwdcwp%2F126&utm_medium=PDF&utm_campaign=PDFCoverPages
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/gpwdcwp?utm_source=digitalcommons.unl.edu%2Fgpwdcwp%2F126&utm_medium=PDF&utm_campaign=PDFCoverPages
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/gpwdcwp?utm_source=digitalcommons.unl.edu%2Fgpwdcwp%2F126&utm_medium=PDF&utm_campaign=PDFCoverPages
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/icwdm?utm_source=digitalcommons.unl.edu%2Fgpwdcwp%2F126&utm_medium=PDF&utm_campaign=PDFCoverPages
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/gpwdcwp?utm_source=digitalcommons.unl.edu%2Fgpwdcwp%2F126&utm_medium=PDF&utm_campaign=PDFCoverPages
http://network.bepress.com/hgg/discipline/172?utm_source=digitalcommons.unl.edu%2Fgpwdcwp%2F126&utm_medium=PDF&utm_campaign=PDFCoverPages
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/gpwdcwp/126?utm_source=digitalcommons.unl.edu%2Fgpwdcwp%2F126&utm_medium=PDF&utm_campaign=PDFCoverPages


REDUCING COYOTE DflmRGE TO SHEEP WITH NON-LETHflL TECHNIQUES
JEFFREY S. GREEN, USDfl-ARS, U.S. Sheep Experiment Station, Dubois, Idaho 83423

ABSTRACT: Since 1972, when the U.S. Government restricted uses of toxicants
for controlling coyotes, a variety of non-lethal techniques has been tested
for effectiveness in protecting livestock. Some were ineffective, but
others helped to reduce the incidence of predation on sheep. In addition to
sound management practices, electric fencing and livestock guarding dogs
appear to have the widest applicability for sheep producers. Mechanical
frightening devices have been successful in some fenced pasture sheep opera-
tions. As with the lethal methods currently used, non-lethal control does
not solve all depredation problems. A combination of various control tech-
niques (both lethal and non-lethal) is necessary to minimize the impact of
predation on sheep.

INTRODUCTION

Prior to 1972 there was little cause to conduct extensive research to
develop alternatives to traditional coyote (Cam's latrans) control techniques
such as trapping and poisoning (Pearson 1981). Animal Damage Control per-
sonnel of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) primarily used lethal
control techniques to combat depredation problems (Evans and Pearson 1980),
and a publication in 1973 describing methods of controlling damage by coyotes
made no mention of non-lethal techniques (Wade 1973). However, following
Executive Order 11643 (February 1972) restricting the use of poison for
controlling predators and the withdrawal of predacide registrations by the
EPA, research funded largely by the Federal Government was intensified to
document livestock losses and to study predator biology, ecology, and behav-
ior, and other methods (primarily non-lethal) of reducing depredation
(Linhart, In Press).

During the past 5 to 8 years, a variety of control techniques has been
explored, and with few exceptions, they have been either non-lethal in nature
or if lethal, have focused on eliminating specific depredating animals. Even
though some of the non-lethal techniques appear to be effective in some
instances, some proponents of lethal control view them as temporary or stop-
gap efforts until the use of toxicants is reinstated.

This paper describes a variety of non-lethal techniques employed to
reduce the loss of sheep to coyotes. Some of the techniques are currently
being used successfully by sheep producers; others have proven to be ineffec-
tive; and others are still in the research and development stages. Although
the techniques are discussed individually, in most situations a combination
of several methods is usually required to minimize sheep losses.

MANAGEMENT PRACTICES

It is widely acknowledged that conscientious management of sheep is a
basic requirement for keeping coyote depredation to a minimum. Sound hus-
bandry practices should be the framework upon which all other control tech-
niques are applied.

-122-



Meduna (1977) examined the management practices of 110 sheep producers
in southcentral Kansas and found that certain practices significantly reduced
losses. Some management techniques are applicable only to farm flock opera-
tions where the sheep are kept near sheds or corrals. Under these conditions
corralling sheep at night has reduced the loss of sheep to predators for some
producers (Boggess et al. 1980), however, in Oregon, other practices were
required in conjunction with night confinement to effectively protect sheep
(de Calesta 1978). Total confinement raising of sheep and lambs offers pro-
tection from predation, however, economic and other factors determine the
practicality of this method of sheep production (Nass, In Press). Shed
lambing offers more protection to ewes and lambs than lambing in pastures
and should be employed when economically feasible (Taylor et al. 1979).

Standard woven wire fences that are kept in good repair offer some
deterrence to coyote movement and prevent livestock from straying (Boggess
et al. 1980). Other practices that may aid in reducing the number of sheep
lost to predation include: 1) keeping records of when and where predation
occurs on an annual basis and deferring grazing in pastures with a history
of heavy loss or grazing pastures with adult sheep that are less vulnerable
to predation than lambs, 2) checking sheep daily, 3) removing carrion from
pastures, and 4) changing lambing dates or shortening the lambing period to
eliminate young lambs from pastures during periods of high predation (Nass,
In Press).

Proper management can also be used to reduce the loss of sheep to
predators on rangeland. (The term rangeland as it is used here denotes a
large number of sheep grazing on unfenced land under the care of a herder.)
Weak, sick, or injured sheep should be removed from the band since their
restricted mobility increases the probability that they will be on the
periphery of the bedground where the likelihood of attack by coyotes is in-
creased (Gluesing 1977). Areas with toxic plants or extremely rough topog-
raphy should be avoided to lessen the possibility of injuring or weakening
sheep. Areas with a history of high depredation risk should be avoided if
possible. Herders that camp out with the sheep and continually remain with
or near them may have fewer losses to predators than those that visit the
band for only brief periods during the day. Bedding the sheep in appropriate
areas may also lessen the incidence of predation.

FRIGHTENING DEVICES

Several methods have been used to frighten predators. The success of
each is quite variable and may often be of relatively short duration.

In Kansas there were significantly fewer losses of livestock to preda-
tors in lighted corrals than in unlighted corrals (Meduna 1977). Lights
seemed to repel some coyotes, but they also made it possible to shoot
specific depredating coyotes at night.

The USFWS has researched a portable battery-operated strobe light that
is used in combination with a warbling-type siren to frighten coyotes (S.
Linhart, personal communication). The device operates with a variable
interval timer and is activated at night by means of a photoelectric cell.
In tests conducted in fenced pastures, predation was reduced by about 89%,
and flocks were protected for periods ranging from 9 to 103 days. The device
caused no observable adverse effects on the sheep. The application of this

-123-



technique may be limited to small pastures, but it may also be effective
near the bedgrounds of range bands.

At least one commercially available frightening device, the Electronic
Shepherd, is being used by some producers. The unit is a portable battery-
operated 8-track tape player. It is supplied with a tape recording of
barking hounds, and individual users have supplied their own tapes of voices,
music, or other distracting noise. I contacted 6 people who had from 1 to
10 devices. Although individual results were variable, all agreed that the
investment was worthwhile. In most instances, the units were used to pro-
vide temporary relief from predation, (i.e. during lambing or on bedgrounds),
and they were used in conjunction with other forms of control (both lethal
and non-lethal).

Propane and acetylene devices that produce an explosion at various
intervals have been successful for some producers (Rock 1978, Boggess et al.
1980). As with other frightening devices, exploders are viewed as a tech-
nique to reduce losses temporarily until more permanent control measures can
be taken.

Some producers have used a variety of livestock animals to frighten
predators. Llamas, burros, donkeys, and any other animal that displays
aggressive behavior to intruders reportedly offer some protection from
predators. (Guarding dogs are discussed in a following section). Formal
research with llamas for livestock protection is being conducted in Wyoming
(M. Botkin, personal communication). Experiences reported by producers
indicate that the protection offered to sheep by other aggressive livestock
is unpredictable in nature and generally of temporary effectiveness.

REPELLENTS, ATTRACTANTS, AND AVERSIVE AGENTS

Studies with olfactory and gustatory aversive compounds that are
sprayed on sheep to repel coyotes were conducted from 1972 to approximately
1978 by federal and university researchers (Lehner 1976, Lehner et al. 1976,
Linhart et al. 1977). Several compounds appeared to temporarily repel
coyotes in certain tests; however, in field trials, the loss of lambs in
untreated control groups did not significantly exceed the loss of lambs in
groups treated with repellents. At least one coyote repellent is currently
marketed commercially; however, controlled field trials indicated that it
did not significantly reduce predation on sheep (J. Green, unpublished data).

Although attractants by themselves are not considered a control tech-
nique, their potential use in conjunction with reproductive inhibitors and
possibly aversive agents (both discussed later), makes a brief discussion
of them important. Attractants have been used for decades in conjunction
with trapping coyotes, and there are likely as many formulations for lures
as there are trappers who use them. Researchers that started working with
attractants in the mid 1970's are continuing to formulate, standardize, and
test coyote attractants. The USFWS developed a fermented egg odor that is
used in annual coyote abundance surveys (Linhart and Knowlton 1975, Linhart
et al. 1977, Bullard et al. 1978), and it has served as a reference standard
for testing other attractant compounds (Timm et al. 1977, Turkowski et al.
1979). Recently federal and university researchers formulated a compound
that is highly attractant and consistently illicits biting and chewing

-124-



responses from captive coyotes (Fagre et al. 1981, Teranishi 1981). Pre-
liminary field tests of the compound are promising, and it is also being used
in conjunction with a pouch capable of delivering specific liquid substances
to coyotes (McKenna et al. 1981). Attractant research has both lethal and
non-lethal applications, and it should provide a more selective avenue of
control.

The use of lithium chloride in aversive conditioning of coyotes was
researched during the past decade. The objective of this technique was to
feed a coyote a prey-like bait that would cause it to become ill, resulting
in the coyote subsequently avoiding the prey. Laboratory and field research
with aversive conditioning has produced inconclusive results (Conover et al.
1979), and there are several significant problems to overcome before aversive
conditioning can be viewed as a viable method of depredation control (Griffiths
et al. 1978). Coyotes must be induced to eat sheep-like baits that have been
treated with an aversive chemical. The chemical must cause sufficient dis-
comfort to cause coyotes to avoid other baits, and further, the avoidance
must be transferred to live sheep. Finally, the avoidance must persist long
enough without reinforcement for the method to offer realistic protection to
sheep. Further research is needed to determine if enough coyotes can be
sufficiently conditioned to avoid killing sheep before aversive conditioning
can be considered an effective tool for controlling predation (Burns 1980,
Burns In Press).

REPRODUCTIVE INHIBITORS

Although coyote reproductive inhibitors are not expected to be ready for
field use in the near future, researchers are continuing to seek suitable
compounds and appropriate methods of administering them to coyotes under
field conditions (Linhart et al. 1968, Stellflug et al. 1978). Antifertility
compounds have been traditionally viewed as a means of reducing the numbers
of coyotes in a given area (Balser 1964). In light of evidence from current
studies of coyote behavioral biology, however, there may also be other reasons
for using chemosterilants (F. Knowlton, personal communication). If an adult
pair of coyotes fail to produce a litter, their tendency to prey upon live-
stock may be decreased because there is no demand to supply food for growing
pups. Since not all coyotes prey upon livestock, it has been theorized that
it may be more advantageous to render a resident pair of coyotes infertile
and allow them to continue to occupy a territory, than to remove them and
open the territory for other coyotes that may kill livestock (F. Knowlton,
personal communication).

A significant obstacle to inhibitor research is finding a compound that
meets specific requirements of efficacy, host specificity, and registration
(Stellflug et al. 1978). The successful field application of antifertility
compounds must be correlated with the development of effective coyote attrac-
tants (discussed previously) and bait delivery systems (currently being
studied by the USFWS).

FENCING

Most coyotes readily cross over, under, or through conventional live-
stock fences and even fences that have been fortified against them (Thompson
1978). Several types of fences have recently been designed that are rela-
tively coyote-proof. Different barrier fence configurations were tested for

-125-



their ability to repel coyotes (Thompson 1979), and the best configuration
was successful in field tests in Oregon (de Calesta and Cropsey 1978).

An electric fence was designed at the U.S. Sheep Experiment Station
that consisted of 12 alternating grounded and charged wires to a height of
1.5 m (Gates et al. 1978). The fence effectively protected lambs from
coyotes in two trials. Since that design was tested, other configurations
of electric fences have been studied and found to be effective (Linhart
et al., In Press). Not only fences of new construction, but also those
modified by the addition of one or more charged wires have been utilized
(Linhart et al., In Press). A trip wire, 10 to 15 cm off the ground and
approximately 20 cm outside the fence, is often effective in preventing coy-
otes from crawling under. A second charged wire is usually offset at the top
of the fence to prevent coyotes from jumping or climbing over, and additional
charged wires can be added between the top and bottom as necessary. A total
of 4 charged wires added to existing fencing effectively protected sheep in
Kansas (Linhart et al., In Press).

Thirty-six individual producers who were using electric fencing were
contacted in a recent survey by the USFWS (Linhart et al., In Press). About
50% of the producers had installed electric fencing to solve depredation
problems, and the remainder installed the fencing as a preventative measure.
Most of the respondents also used other forms of control in conjunction with
electric fencing. Not all of the fences were properly constructed or main-
tained, therefore, effectiveness was variable among the fences in use. The
combined data from 14 producers who provided adequate information indicated
that electric fencing had resulted in a total reduction of losses due to
coyotes of 94%. Sixty-eight percent of the respondents rated their fences
as very effective and 32% as fairly effective for protecting their stock.

Because of added expense and increased maintenance requirements, electric
and barrier fencing is best suited to farm flock operations where the degree
of predation and other factors make it economically feasible. Most electric
fences require continued maintenance to keep them operational and must be
properly constructed to be effectively functional.

LIVESTOCK GUARDING DOGS

Although guarding dogs have long been used to protect livestock in
Europe (Coppinger and Coppinger 1980a), they have been used for flock protec-
tion in this country only since the mid to late 1970's (Linhart et al. 1979,
Green and Woodruff 1980). Livestock guarding dogs appear to be an economi-
cally sound form of control (total first year costs may average $900 and
subsequent yearly costs may average $300) (Green et al. 1980), and in one
report, the majority of producers contacted who used dogs for flock protection
were pleased with the results (Green and Woodruff 1980). With the exception
of the Navajo Indians who use mongrel dogs (A. Black, personal communication),
all of the guarding breeds are of Eurasian origin (Coppinger and Coppinger
1980b).

Dog research in the United States is conducted primarily at two locations,
Hampshire College's New England Farm Center (NEFC) in Amherst, Massachusetts
and the U.S. Sheep Experiment Station (USSES), USDA Agricultural Research
Service in Dubois, Idaho. Research with livestock guarding dogs began at the
USSES in the fall of 1977. Over 50 dogs have been studied to date. Most of

-126-



them have been reared and observed at the USSES, and over 25 have also been
placed with cooperating sheep producers in various western states. Of the
total number of dogs studied, approximately 60% were rated as good to excel-
lent with respect to performance in remaining with sheep and significantly
reducing predation. Only one of the total of dogs studied has been con-
sidered a complete failure. The success rate of the dogs acquired in the
last 2 years of the study is greater: over 75% of these dogs were rated good
to excellent. The increased success is due to improved dog rearing techniques
and the placement of dogs into operations suited to their temperament and
abilities.

Researchers at the NEFC have placed several hundred guarding dogs with
sheep producers across the country. The majority of those producers who
responded to a questionnaire felt that their dog was helping to keep predators
away from their sheep. Since many of the dogs are young and have been work-
ing a relatively short time, future surveys will be important in determining
the overall effectiveness of the dogs (R. Coppinger, personal communication).

Guarding dogs have primarily been used in farm pasture conditions (Green
and Woodruff 1980), but a growing number of producers are using guarding dogs
with range sheep (J. Green, unpublished data). Dogs are currently in use in
the majority of states where significant numbers of sheep and goats are
raised, with concentrations in Colorado, North and South Dakota, Oregon,
Texas, and the New England states.

Although no special skills or equipment are generally needed to rear a
successful dog, it is important to socialize a young pup (7-8 weeks of age)
to sheep (Green and Woodruff, In Press). The objective of the socialization
is to emphasize the dog-sheep relationship and minimize the dog-human rela-
tionship. A primary problem of using livestock guarding dogs is keeping the
dog with sheep. The early socialization process appears to help reduce the
frequency of occurrence of this problem. It is equally important to allow a
period of several weeks or longer for the sheep to become accustomed to the
dog.

A successful livestock guarding dog possesses several key characteris-
tics: (1) it remains with or near the sheep continually (or at least during
times when the potential for predation is high), (2) it does not harm, chase,
or harass the sheep, and (3) it is appropriately aggressive to potential
predators (Coppinger and Coppinger 1980b).

Guarding dogs are different than herding dogs. Herding dogs are used
to move sheep from one area to another, and they do so by biting, chasing, or
barking at the sheep. Herding dogs are responsive and work according to
signals (verbal and hand) given by a handler, and they are generally not left
alone with the sheep. Guarding dogs are aloof and usually do not herd sheep;
are discouraged from biting, chasing, and barking at sheep; and act inde-
pendently of people.

There is no consensus of which breed of dog is the best livestock
guardian. However, certain breeds appear better suited for some working
conditions than others. At the USSES we have worked with the Komondor,
Great Pyrenees, Akbash Dog, and Shar Planinetz breeds. Only a few individ-
uals of the latter 2 breeds have been observed. Based on the data

-127-



available from our Komondorok and Great Pyrenees, the Pyrenees appears to be
better suited for working with rangeland flocks of sheep than the Komondor.
Pyrenees are not as playful with sheep and are generally less rambunctious
at a young age than Komondorok. Pyrenees often display the appropriate calm
behavior and temperament for working on open range by 6 to 10 months of age,
while the Komondorok we have observed may take up to 18 to 24 months to reach
a comparable level of calmness. Pyrenees do not appear to bond as strongly
to a single master as Komondorok and are thus less apt to guard the shepherd
rather than the sheep. Pyrenees are generally more adaptable to new people
and terrain than Komondorok and consequently work well with sheep that are
continually moving into new territory.

The Komondor appears well suited to pasture work. They have less of a
tendency to roam than the Pyrenees, and where neighbors or busy roads are a
threat to dogs, this trait can be advantageous. Our Komondorok appear to be
more aloof of human intruders than our Great Pyrenees, and this trait is
desirable in many situations. However, many of our Great Pyrenees also have
worked well in fenced pasture conditions.

Dogs do not offer immediate relief from predation since mature and
effective guardians are not available to most producers. Time, effort, and
good fortune are required to bring a puppy to maturity, and there is no
guarantee that any dog, regardless of its breeding, will be a successful
guardian when it matures. Nevertheless, the percentage of successful dogs
is high, and some dogs may begin to offer protection by the time they are 6
to 8 months of age.

As with any other method (lethal or non-lethal) of controlling predators,
guarding dogs are not effective in all situations. But unlike many mechanical
methods of control, experienced dogs can adapt to the changing predatory
habits of coyotes and can do so without human intervention. It appears that
livestock guarding dogs are a feasible method of control with widespread
application, and they can be viewed as a continual form of livestock protec-
tion to be supplemented with other control measures as necessary.

CONCLUSION

Some forms of non-lethal control have proven to be ineffective for pro-
tecting sheep (repellents), and others have produced inconclusive results
(aversive conditioning). Other methods are currently being studied (anti-
fertility agents) and may be useful in solving some depredation problems. A
few methods have significantly reduced losses for some producers (electric
and barrier fences, some frightening devices, guarding dogs, and certain
management practices). Most producers who successfully minimize livestock
losses to predators use an integrated approach with a combination of sheep
management techniques and lethal and non-lethal control methods.

The responses from 103 sheep producers to a questionnaire regarding
various forms of predator control were reported by Newbold (1980). The
producers were asked to rate the effectiveness of non-lethal methods of
control in reducing livestock losses to predators, and they responded as
follows: 12% reported poor results, 30% fair, 30% good, and 21% excellent.
Producers with large numbers of sheep found non-lethal methods less effective
than was found by producers with fewer sheep and 21% reported poor results,
46% fair, 21% good, and 8% excellent.

-128-



Biologists, livestock producers, and other knowledgeable people are well
aware that the adaptability of the coyote necessitates a wide variety of con-
trol measures. No single method can be expected to solve all depredation
problems. Although at this writing, the present administration had not
announced its policy regarding predator control, there is hope by some that
restrictions on toxicants and other lethal methods will be relaxed. Whether
or not this hope is realized, an array of techniques, both lethal and non-
lethal, will likely continue to be the most effective approach to controlling
predation.

Sheep numbers in the United States have increased during the past 2
years, and future expansion of the industry is expected to be greatest in
small farm flock operations. Many of these operations will be in urbanized
areas where the legal use of toxicants and other lethal techniques may never
be possible. In light of this and the fact that anti-trap legislation is
pending in 33 states (S. Linhart, personal communication), there is a con-
tinuing need for research and development of effective non-lethal techniques,
and in some locations and situations, they may be used exclusively and
effectively to protect livestock.

LITERATURE CITED

BALSER, D.S. 1964. Management of predator populations with antifertility
agents. J. Wild!. Manage. 28(2):352-358.

BOGGESS, E.K., F.R. HENDERSON, and C.W. SPAETH. 1980. Managing predator
problems: practices and procedures for preventing and reducing live-
stock losses. Coop. Exten. Serv., Kansas St. Univ., Manhattan. 19 pp.

BULLARD, R.W., S.A. SHUMAKE, D.L. CAMPBELL, F.J. TURKOWSKI, and S.R. KILBURN.
1978. Preparation and evaluation of a synthetic egg coyote attractant
and deer repellent. J. Agric. Food Chem. 26(1) :160-163.

BURNS, R.J. 1980. Evaluation of conditioned predation aversion for con-
trolling coyote predation. J. Wildl. Manage. 44(4):938-942.

BURNS, R.J. In Press. Predation aversion with lithium chloride - management
implications and comments. Proc. symp. situation management of two
intermountain species: aspen and coyotes. Utah State Univ., Logan,
Utah. 23-24 April 1981.

CONOVER, M.R., J.G. FRANCIK, and D.E. MILLER. 1979. Aversive conditioning
in coyotes; a reply. J. Wildl. Manage. 43(1):209-211.

COPPINGER, L. and R. COPPINGER. 1980a. So firm a friendship. Nat. History
89:12-26.

COPPINGER, R. and L. COPPINGER. 1980b. Livestock guarding dogs, an old
world solution to an age-old problem. Country Journal 7(4):68-77.

de CALESTA, D.S. 1978. Documentation of livestock losses to predators in
Oregon. Oregon State Univ. Ext. Ser. Spec. Rep. 501. 20 pp.

de CALESTA, D.S. and M.G. CROPSEY. 1978. Field test of a coyote-proof
fence. Wildl. Soc. Bull. 6(4):256-259.

-129-



EVANS, G.D. and E.W. PEARSON. 1980. Federal coyote control methods used in
the western United States, 1971-77. Wildl. Soc. Bull. 8(l):34-39.

FAGRE, D.B., D.A. BARNUM, A.C. FAGRE, and W.E. HOWARD. 1981. Development
of coyote attractants: 1980-1981 progress report. Annual Meeting
WRCC-26, Twin Falls, Idaho. August 11-12. Abstract.

GATES, N.L., J.E. RICH, D.D. GODTEL, and C.V. HULET. 1978. Development and
evaluation of anti-coyote electric fencing. J. Range Manage. 31(2):
151-153.

GLUESING, E.A. 1977. Sheep behavior and vulnerability to coyote predation.
Ph.D. Thesis, Utah State Univ. 121 pp.

GREEN, J.S. and R.A. WOODRUFF. 1980. Is predator control going to the dogs?
Rangelands 2(5):187-189.

GREEN, J.S. and R.A. WOODRUFF. In Press. Livestock guarding dogs: develop-
ments and current status. Proc. symp. situation management of two
intermountain species: aspen and coyotes. Utah State Univ., Loqan,
Utah. 23-24 April 1981.

GREEN, J.S., T.T. TUELLER, and R.A. WOODRUFF. 1980. Livestock guarding
dogs: economics and predator control. Rangelands 2(6) :247-248.

GRIFFITHS, R.E. JR., G.E. CONNOLLY, R.J. BURNS, and R.T. STERNER. 1978.
Coyotes, sheep and lithium chloride. Proc. Eighth Verteb. Pest Conf.,
Sacramento, Calif., March 7-9 (W.E. Howard, ed.), pp. 190-196, Publ.
University of California, Davis.

LEHNER, P.N. 1976. Coyote behavior: implications for management. Wildl.
Soc. Bull. 4(3):120-126.

LEHNER, P.N., R. KRUMM, and A.T. CRINGAN. 1976. Tests for olfactory
repellents for coyotes and dogs. J. Wildl. Manage. 40(1):145-150.

LINHART, S.B. In Press. Nonremoval coyote management techniques: where,
when, and why. Proc. symp. situation management of two intermountain
species: aspen and coyotes. Utah State Univ., Logan, Utah. 23-24
April 1981.

LINHART, S.B. and F.F. KNOWLTON. 1975. Determining the relative abundance
of coyotes by scent station lines. Wildl. Soc. Bull. 3(3):119-124.

LINHART, S.B., G.J. DASCH, J.D. ROBERTS, and P.J. SAVARIE. 1977. Test
methods for determining the efficacy of coyote attractants and repel-
lents. Pages 114-122 J_n W.B. Jackson and R.E. Marsh, eds. Spec. Tech.
Publ. 625. Am. Soc. Test. Mater., Philadelphia.

LINHART, S.B., H.H. BRUSMAN, and D.S. BALSER. 1968. Field evaluation of an
antifertility agent, stilbestrol, for inhibiting coyote reproduction.
Trans. 33rd N. Amer. Wildl. Nat. Res. Conf. 316-327.

LINHART, S.B., J.D. ROBERTS, and G.J. DASCH. In Press. Electric fencing
reduces coyote predation on pastured sheep. J. Range Manage.

-130-



LINHART, S.B., R.T. STERNER, T.C. CARRI6AN, and D.R. HENNE. 1979. Komondor
guard dogs reduce sheep losses to coyotes: a preliminary evaluation.
J. Range Manage. 32(3):238-241.

MCKENNA, S.M., W.E. HOWARD, and R.E. MARSH. 1981. Nontoxic bait-pouch
field tests. 1981 Annual Meeting WRCC-26, Twin Falls, Idaho. August
11-12. Abstract.

MEDUNA, R.L. 1977. Relationships between sheep management and coyote
predation. M.S. Thesis, Kansas State Univ. 140 pp.

NASS, R.D. In Press. Predation and livestock husbandry practices. Proc.
symp. situation management of two intermountain species: aspen and
coyotes. Utah State Univ., Logan, Utah. 23-24 April 1981.

NEWBOLD, V.F. 1980. Non-lethal methods - boon for some, bust for others.
Natl. Wool Grower 70(6):14-16.

PEARSON, E.W. 1981. A review of predator research. USFWS Denver Wildlife
Research Center. Special Report. 20 pp.

ROCK, T.W. 1978. An evaluation of seasonal coyote control techniques and
sheep losses in Saskatchewan. M.S. Thesis, Univ. of Nevada, Reno.
54 pp.

STELLFLU6, J.N., N.L. GATES, and R.G. SASSER. 1978. Reproductive inhibitors
for coyote population control: developments and current status. Proc.
Eighth Vert. Pest Conf., Sacramento, Calif., March 7-9 (W.E. Howard,
ed.), pp. 185-189, Pub!. University of California, Davis.

TAYLOR, R.G., J.P. WORKMAN, and J.E. BOWNS. 1979. The economics of sheep
predation in southwestern Utah. J. Range Manage. 32(4):317-321.

TERANISHI, R. 1981. Development of W-U lures. Annual Meeting WRCC-26,
Twin Falls, Idaho. August 11-12. Abstract.

TIMM, R.M., W.E. HOWARD, M.W. MONROE, R. TERANISHI, and E.L. MURPHY. 1977.
A method for evaluating coyote scent baits. in_: Test methods for
vertebrate pest control and management materials (W.B. Jackson and
R.E. Marsh, eds.) pp. 151-156. Amer. Soc. Test Mater., Philadelphia.
Spec. Tech. Publ. 625. 258 pp.

THOMPSON, B.C. 1978. Fence-crossing behavior exhibited by coyotes. Wildl.
Soc. Bull. 6(1) :14-17.

THOMPSON, B.C. 1979. Evaluation of wire fences for coyote control. J.
Range Manage. 32(6) :457-461.

TURKOWSKI, F.J., M.L. POPELKA, B.B. GREEN, and R.W. BULLARD. 1979. Testing
the responses of coyotes and other predators to odor attractants.
Pages 255-269 _In_ J.R. Beck, ed. Spec. Tech. Publ. 680, Am. Soc. Test.
Mater., Philadelphia.

WADE, D.A. 1973. Control of damage by coyotes and some other carnivores.
West. Res. Pub. No. 11., Coop. Ext. Serv., Colo. State Univ. 28 pp.

-131-


	University of Nebraska - Lincoln
	DigitalCommons@University of Nebraska - Lincoln
	10-15-1981

	Reducing Coyote Damage To Sheep With Non-Lethal Techniques
	Jeffrey S. Green




