data\Gustavson et al, 1974.pdfdcterms:modified: 2015-04-20T15:29:43Z
access_permission:can_modify: true
access_permission:assemble_document: true
access_permission:can_print_degraded: true
created: Mon Apr 20 08:29:43 PDT 2015
meta:save-date: 2015-04-20T15:29:43Z
access_permission:can_print: true
pdf:docinfo:modified: 2015-04-20T15:29:43Z
pdf:encrypted: false
X-Parsed-By: 
org.apache.tika.parser.DefaultParser
org.apache.tika.parser.pdf.PDFParser
Last-Save-Date: 2015-04-20T15:29:43Z
access_permission:modify_annotations: true
Content-Type: application/pdf
dcterms:created: 2015-04-20T15:29:43Z
Creation-Date: 2015-04-20T15:29:43Z
X-TIKA:parse_time_millis: 38
meta:creation-date: 2015-04-20T15:29:43Z
date: 2015-04-20T15:29:43Z
xmpMM:DocumentID: uuid:3c720e53-1dd2-11b2-0a00-000008a7cfff
xmpTPg:NPages: 3
access_permission:extract_content: true
dc:format: application/pdf; version=1.4
pdf:docinfo:producer: Adobe PDF Library 9.1
modified: 2015-04-20T15:29:43Z
producer: Adobe PDF Library 9.1
access_permission:fill_in_form: true
pdf:docinfo:created: 2015-04-20T15:29:43Z
pdf:PDFVersion: 1.4
Last-Modified: 2015-04-20T15:29:43Z
access_permission:extract_for_accessibility: true
!PDF_CONTENT!
--------------------------------



































of the number of items in the list to
be retrieved (7) but not of the num-
ber of items in the potential search
space in LTS.

These findings appear to indicate
that free recall verbal learning may re-
quire retrieval from LTS and that most
recall failures after initial recall repre-
sent retrieval failures rather than loss
of (information about) items retained
in LTS. Apparently, presentation of
items only until they have been re-
called at least once is sufficient for
storage and retention of almost all
items, as demonstrated by subsequent
spontaneous retrieval without any fur-
ther presentation. Once an item has
been spontaneously retrieved from
LTS the probability of subsequent re-
trieval is very great, so that retrieval
from LTS increases without further
presentation. There is very little sup-
port in these data for the assumption
that (information about) items is lost
from LTS during verbal learning. These
results support the assumptions previ-
ously made in the analysis of verbal
learning by selective reminding (8)
that items remain in LTS and that re-
call failures may reasonably be re-
garded as retrieval failures.

HERMAN BUSCHKE
Saul R. Korey Department of
Neurology and Rose F. Kennedy
Center for Research in Mental
Retardation and Human Development,
Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, New York 10461

References and Notes

1. The items in the animal list were: dog, fox,
horse, buffalo, lion, rhinoceros, elephant, ante-
lope, bear, lamb, rat, raccoon, sheep, llama,
goat, cheetah, squirrel, beaver, donkey, and
turtle.

2. The items in the mixed list were: Chicago,
hand, tulip, zebra, carpenter, brandy, clarinet,
Norway, train, cup, slippers, tennis, lemon,
pigeon, corn, desk, spider, garlic, elm, and shark.

3. The following categories were used for verbal
interference by spontaneous retrieval before
recall of the list to be learned: names of
states, boys' names, articles of clothing, verbs,
colors, occupations or professions, musical
instruments, foreign countries, trees, girls'
names, relatives (types of), and natural earth
formations.

4. Both extended recall on each recall attempt
and many recall attempts (without further pres-
entation) seem to be needed to obtain the
maximum spontaneous retrieval from LTS
necessary to evaluate storage, retention, and
retrieval accurately. Since the subject must
learn that it is possible to retrieve additional
items by such extended recall, it is important
to provide enough time and encouragement to
allow maximum retrieval from the very first
trial on. This also requires the subject to try
to recall all items in the list, rather than just
some self-selected part of the list. Our subjects
have reacted positively to the challenge of
achieving their own maximum retrieval without
further presentation.

5. Such consistent retrieval from LTS on all
subsequent recall attempts without any further
presentation may also provide an estimate of
list learning. We would ordinarily say that a
list has been learned when the subject can

3 MAY 1974

consistently recall all of the items in that
list without any further presentations. There-
fore, it would also seem reasonable to say
that when a subject can recall half of the items
consistently on all subsequent recall attempts,
without any further presentation of those
items, the subject has learned a (smaller)
list of just those items (and has learned half
of the entire list to be learned), since this
seems to be what we mean when we say that
a list has been learned. The cumulative number
of items that are consistently retrieved from
LTS on all subsequent recall attempts should
therefore provide an estimate of list learning
for comparison with item learning.

6. F. I. M. Craik [J. Verb. Learn. Verb. Behav.
7, 996 (1968); ibid. 9, 143 (1970)] has shown
that items from short-term storage are not

Predation of lambs by feral coyotes,
in the public lands of the western
United States, has led to a sharp con-
troversy between naturalists who wish
to see this carnivore survive in its
natural habitat and stockmen who wish
to reduce sheep losses to predatory
coyotes. The principal method of con-
trolling predation has been simply to
kill the coyotes, employing bounty
hunters, traps, and lethal poisons. These
methods do not distinguish between
the sheep killers and other coyotes (1).
We are devising behavioral methods
which spare both prey and predator.

If an animal eats a poisoned meal
and survives, it will develop an aver-
sion for the flavor of that meal. Such
conditioned aversions have been studied
most extensively in the rat, which is
an omnivore specialized in seeking and
testing new sources of food, including
many plants which could be toxic (2).
Several general questions arise: (i)
Can such aversions be as readily estab-
lished in a feral carnivore which preys
principally on animals? (ii) Will gusta-
tory aversions inhibit attack behavior
directed at olfactory, auditory, and
visual aspects of living prey? (iii) Can
the inhibitory effect be limited to a
specific prey (for example, lambs),
leaving other options (for example,
rabbits) open to the predator?
Our subjects were seven adult coy-

otes, approximately 2 to 4 years of age,
maintained in individual dog runs. Five
coyotes were removed from their feral
den at approximately 3 weeks of age.
Three (male "Brujo" and females

recalled at delayed testing after presentation
and testing of other lists, even though they
are recalled at immediate testing. This effect
is shown in the present data by failure to
retrieve about one item again after the first
recall. Since retrieval from LTS may occur
only after many recall attempts, this effect
would have been greater if repeated retrieval
attempts had not been used.

7. R. M. Shiffrin, Science 168, 1601 (1970).
8. H. Buschke, J. Verb. Learn. Verb. Behav. 12,

543 (1973).
9. This work was supported by PHS grants MH-

17733 from NIMH, NS-03356 from NIMS, and
HT-01799 from NICHD. I thank Christine
Hiney for experimental assistance.

23 November 1973 .

"Luna" and "Coty") had hunted rab-
bits in the desert, while two (male
"Feisty" and female "Dizzy") had no
hunting experience. All were relatively
domesticated and readily attacked both
lambs and rabbits. The male "Sam"
and female "Mary" were trapped as
adults and were shy feral animals, each
with an amputated forepaw, a result of
the trapping. After several months of
habituation to captivity Sam attacked
and ate rabbits, but refused to attack
lambs even when they were placed in
his pen for hours. Mary would not
attack either animal.
Our general procedure was to main-

tain the animals on one "safe food"
and then present a "poison food" laced
with lithium chloride or followed by
an intraperitoneal injection of lithium
chloride. In the hamburger experiment,
four coyotes (Brujo, Coty, Luna, and
Mary) were maintained on dog food
and given fresh hamburger on two
occasions. On the first hamburger trial
the meat contained 6.0 g of lithium
chloride in 31 capsules (No. 4 gelatin
coated with a cellulose acetate com-
pound). All the animals became ill
and vomited after that meal (3). Three
days later the animals were presented
with unpoisoned hamburger and re-
fused to eat the meat. After the ham-
burger test, they ate a full ration of
dog food, indicating the aversion was
specific to hamburger (see Fig. 1).
During the attack experiment, each
coyote was placed in an individual
pen approximately 4 by 5 by 4 feet
high (1 foot - 0.3 m). The individual

581

Coyote Predation Control by Aversive Conditioning
Abstract. Conditioned aversions were induced in coyotes by producing lithium

chloride illness in them following a meal, and the ejfects upon eating and attack
behavior were observed. One trial with a given meat and lithium is sufficient to
establish a strong aversion which inhibits eating thye flesh of that prey. One or
two trials with a given flesh (lamb or rabbit) specifically suppresses the attack
upon the averted prey but leaves the coyote free to attack the alternative prey.
A method of saving both prey and predator is discussed.

 o
n 

A
pr

il 
20

, 2
01

5
w

w
w

.s
ci

en
ce

m
ag

.o
rg

D
ow

nl
oa

de
d 

fr
om

 
 o

n 
A

pr
il 

20
, 2

01
5

w
w

w
.s

ci
en

ce
m

ag
.o

rg
D

ow
nl

oa
de

d 
fr

om
 

 o
n 

A
pr

il 
20

, 2
01

5
w

w
w

.s
ci

en
ce

m
ag

.o
rg

D
ow

nl
oa

de
d 

fr
om

 

http://www.sciencemag.org/
http://www.sciencemag.org/
http://www.sciencemag.org/


pens were located on the perimeter of
a large grassy enclosure approximately
30 by 40 feet, where the animals were
exercised daily. Latencies to attack, to
eat, and to vomit after lithium treat-
ment were timed by stop watch and
photographed with still or motion pic-
ture cameras. During this period the
coyotes *were given a safe meal of
rabbit every 48 hours and lamb was
substituted on test days. Attacks on
lambs and rabbits were usually fatal.
On day 1, a rabbit was released into

the large enclosure in view of the coy-
ote. The coyote pen door was opened
and timing started for the attack laten-
cy. On day 3 this test was repeated
with a lamb. On day 5, each coyote
was given a bait packet of minced
lamb flesh wrapped in a fresh woolly
lamb hide. On day 7, they were tested
with a rabbit which they attacked im-
mediately and then consumed. On day
9, this test was repeated with a live
lamb. Brujo and Coty immediately at-
tacked and killed their lambs but the
latency to begin feeding increased
markedly (Brujo, from 270 seconds to
1200 seconds; Coty, from 600 seconds
to 1680 seconds), and the rate of feed-
ing was decreased. In contrast, Luna
did not attack; instead she actively
avoided the lamb. After 15 minutes
the lamb was removed and a rabbit
was presented. Luna immediately at-
tacked the rabbit and subsequently ate
it. Luna's attack data are summarized
on line 1 of Table 1.
The two coyotes whose attacks were

not suppressed vomited soon after eat-
ing the bait packet containing lithium
(Brujo, 42 minutes; Coty, 30 minutes).
Luna vomited later (80 minutes) and
thus may have absorbed more lithium
chloride. Therefore, on day 13 we
gave Brujo and Coty a second lamb
meat-lithium treatment followed by
an intraperitoneal injection of 2.5 g
of lithium chloride in 100 ml of water
(4). On day 15, the two coyotes were
tested with a rabbit which they at-

Days

Fig. 1.Idvda gah,frforcyts

E
E t

o .50f IL E

an ) pioe hambredy2, and

ot
o .
-.25- E

1 2 3 4 5

Days

Fig. 1. Individual graphs, for four coyotes,
of food consumed: dog food (days 1, 3,
and 4), poisoned hamburger (day 2), and
unpoisoned hamburger (day 5).

tacked immediately and then consumed.
On day 17, they were presented with
a lamb which they did not attack
(Table 1, lines 2 and 3).
We then tested two more animals

(Dizzy and Feisty) which had no prior
experience with lithium illness. The
procedures were essentially the same,
except that dog food was the safe
food provided on the intervening days
and a rabbit carcass perfused with 5 g
of lithium chloride in 50 ml of water
was the poison food. The poison meal
was followed by the immediate injec-
tion described above. The results par-
alleled the earlier studies. One treat-
ment did not suppress attacks upon the
rabbit but did suppress feeding during
the 15-minute period. When presented
with a dead rabbit during the second
treatment, they mouthed it but did not
actually eat it. They were then given
a second injection. Subsequently they
refused to attack the rabbit but im-
mediately attacked the lamb (Table 1,
lines 4 and 5). The feral male (Sam)
would not attack a lamb, so he was
tested with rabbits only on the same
schedule. One meal of the toxic rabbit
was sufficient to suppress his attack
upon live rabbits (Table 1, line 6).
The behavior of the coyotes in the

posttreatment tests and the extinction

Table 1. The time taken by coyotes to attack a live rabbit and a live lamb before and
after experimental treatment, which consisted of pairing lamb or rabbit flesh with illness-
producing lithium chloride. No att., no attack.

Before treatment Treatment: LiCl After treatment
Rabbit Lamb paired with Rabbit Lamb

Luna 4 sec 1 sec Lamb flesh (once) 1 sec No att.
Brujo 1 sec 1 sec Lamb flesh (twice) 1 sec No att.
Coty 1 sec 1 sec Lamb flesh (twice) 2 sec No att.
Dizzy 1 sec 1 sec Rabbit flesh (twice) No att. 2 sec
Feisty 61 sec 6 sec Rabbit flesh (twice) No att. 2 sec
Sam 231 sec No att. Rabbit flesh (once) No att. No test

582

tests in which the averted animals were
presented at weekly intervals revealed
some interesting patterns. After becom-
ing sick on hamburger, they buried
their vomitus. When presented with
hamburger, Luna sniffed and licked it
and then turned away. Brujo buried his
hamburger. Coty urinated on her ham-
burger and repeated this behavior with
the lamb she killed after the first flesh-
lithium treatment.

After a single lamb flesh-lithium
treatment, Luna loped up to the lamb,
sniffed it, and circled back, hiding
under a cage and vomiting within 1
minute. She then retreated into her
pen. When the lamb followed her into
her pen, she growled and snapped at
the lamb, then gagged and retched,
breaking off the attack with no injury
to the lamb. Luna died several days
later. Since she showed good activity
and appetite following her last treat-
ment, and her autopsy was negative,
the cause of death was uncertain.

Coty made a lunge at the lamb after
the second treatment but stopped
abruptly, turned her back to the lamb,
and spent the rest of the test period
eating grass. Brujo also ate grass on
his last three extinction trials. This
behavior was observed only during
posttreatment tests with lambs, thus it
may be an example of "displacement
behavior" often observed when motiva-
tion or drive is high but consummatory
behavior is blocked. A week later,
Coty attacked a lamb but interrupted
her attack without killing. Brujo was
tested for 8 weeks without a single
attack.
The group conditioned with rabbit

and lithium was also variable in extinc-
tion. Feisty attacked in 140 seconds
after 4 weeks, Dizzy in 400 seconds
after 2 weeks, and Sam in 120 seconds
after 1 week. In the identical pattern,
each coyote carefully first chewed off
and consumed the ears, then ceased
eating for about 30 minutes. Next, he
ate the head and waited another half
hour before returning to consume the
rest of the body. Before treatment, the
coyotes attacked the back of the neck
and began consuming the neck, head,
and finally the ears without long peri-
ods between bouts of eating before
commencing on the body. The animals
appear to be reacquiring a taste for
rabbit meat, as eating is now followed
by nutritious effects without toxic ef-
fects.
We propose a two-phase conditioning

process in mammals on the basis of
previous work (5). In phase one, the

SCIENCE, VOL. 184



flavor of food becomes aversive after
one illness, after which the sights and
sounds of the prey may still elicit at-
tack but the aversive flavor inhibits
feeding. Phase two occurs when the
auditory, visual, and olfactory cues
from the prey become associated with
the now aversive flavor, thus subse-
quent attacks are inhibited and perhaps
a second treatment is unnecessary. In
some cases emesis may forge an as-
sociation between vomited gustatory
cues and odors of the vomitus which
is sufficient for the second phase of
conditioning.
For suppressing sheep predation, we

could scatter baits that smell like sheep,
taste like sheep, and contain a non-
lethal emetic toxin. We could also
perfuse carcasses of lambs and sheep
with lithium. The predator could then
be expected to subject himself to re-
peated trials until the flavor and the
spoor of sheep becomes aversive. Sub-
sequently, when foraging it would turn
away before it sights sheep. Thus in
open range, the aversive effect may be
much more durable than our extinc-
tion data indicate. Our coyotes had
no other food and few other activity
options in the small enclosure. The
lambs persisted in following the coy-
otes, and occasionally a rabbit literally
leaped into a coyote's jaws.

In addition, the feeding habits of
the mother coyote averted to sheep
might be transmitted to her pups, via
flavor which her diet imparts to her
milk, and by their early experience
with the prey she brings to the den.
Similar mechanisms have been demon-
strated in the rat (6). This method
should be effective against other preda-
tors, such as large cat species and
eagles. Studies (7) indicate that birds
form aversions to the visual as well
as gustatory aspects of food, so the
infused lamb may be the method of
choice for eagles. Finally, since it is
known that flavors are enhanced when
beneficial effects follow ingestion (8),
this method could also be used to
change the food preferences of some
species that are endangered because
their naturally preferred food is dimin-
ishing owing to ecological change.

CARL R. GUSTAVSON
Department of Psychology, University
of Utah, Salt Lake City 84112

JOHN GARCIA
WALTER G. HANKINS

KENNETH W. RUSINIAK
Departments of Psychology and
Psychiatry, University of
California, Los Angeles 90024
3 MAY 1974

References and Notes

1. F. Wagner, "Coyotes and sheep," 44th Honor
Lecture Faculty Association, Utah State Uni-
versity, Logan, January 1972.

2. For general reviews, see J. Garcia et al. and
P. Rozin and J. W. Kalat, in Biological Bound-
aries of Learning, M. E. P. Seligman and J.
Hager, Eds. (Appleton-Century-Crofts, New
York, 1973).

3. One coyote (Mary) gulped the entire hamburger
with 6.0 g of lithium chloride; the others
gingerly separated out some of the capsules;
however, they all ingested 3.0 g or more.
The dose absorbed cannot be specified because
of vomiting. Other tests indicate that for
intraperitoneal injections of 0.12M LiCl, 100
ml induces vomiting and 250 ml produces a
strong aversion in coyotes weighing 9 to 13
kg. The cellulose-covered capsules were de-
signed to pass through the stomach into the
intestine, thus avoiding ejection by vomiting.

4. To establish maximal learning in one or
two trials and thus minimize attack testing, we
employed the combination of (i) LiCl (6.0 g)
treated food in case the animal vomited and

The "sweet tooth" is a widespread
phenomenon of animal behavior, and
the exceptions, according to Pfaffmann
(1), are ". . . remarkable largely for
their divergence from what otherwise
appears to be a general rule .... Gusta-
tory stimuli, therefore, appear to be bio-
logically determined as the instigator of
consummatory . . . responses." From
studies of animal behavior it is rela-
tively difficult to distinguish between
the discriminative function of sweetness
as information and the reinforcing prop-
erty of sweetness, although direct meth-
ods have been used with some success
in specific experimental paradigms (2).
Electrophysiological evidence from the
recordings of chorda tympani suggest
that the hedonic and intensity aspects
of taste conform to quite different laws
(1 ), but relatively little attention has
been paid to man, whose capacity for
language can allow him to evaluate,
simultaneously, the intensity and hed-
onic aspects of taste stimuli.

Investigations of sweetness and the
pleasantness of sweetness through hu-
man psychophysical scaling raise the
possibility that two quite different
growth laws may be obtained, by in-
structing the observer to attend to these
two separate aspects of taste impres-
sions. When an observer matches num-
bers to sweetness so that ratios of these
numbers reflect ratios among perceived
sweetness, then rated sweetness appears

reingested the vomitus and (ii! intraneritnneal
injection to ensure an effective absorbed dose.
Since 0.12M Lbia is simriii i..aI - v*ily biO
logical saline, lithium treatment does not rad-
ically alter the flavor of the prey.

5. J. Garcia, J. C. Clarke, W. G. Hankins, in
Perspectives in Ethology, P. P. G. Bateson and
P. H. Klopfer, Eds. (Plenum, New York,
1973).

6. B. G. Galef and M. M. Clark, J. Comp. Physiol.
Psychol. 78, 220 (1972).

7. L. P. Brower, Sci. Am. 220, 22 (February
1969); H. C. Wilcoxon, W. B. Dragoin, P. A.
Kral, Science 171, 826 (1971).

8. J. Garcia, R. F. Ervin, C. H. Yorke, R. A.
Koelling, Science 122, 716 (1967); K. W.
Green and J. Garcia, ibid. 173, 749 (1971);
S. F. Meier, Psychonomic Sci. 17, 309 (1969).

9. Supported in part by PHS grant lROl NS
11041-01. We thank Ecodynamics for supply-
ing and maintaining coyotes, and Buzz Moss
for the use of his coyotes and his photography.
Address correspondence to J.G., Department
of Psychiatry, Neuropsychiatric Institute, Uni-
versity of California, Los Angeles 90024.

4 January 1974 0

to increase systematically according to
a power function of concentration:
S = kCn (3), where S is sweetness; C,
concentration; and k and exponent n
are constants. The pleasantness of the
same sweet taste does not, however,
rise continuously with concentration
(4) but either flattens out or may even
decrease at very high concentrations.
Human psychophysical scaling of taste
intensity and taste pleasantness rely
upon short-term exposures to sugar so-
lutions (a model system), so that the
scientific study of taste hedonics is
based upon stimuli that do not resem-
ble actual foods. This study concerns
functional relations for both the model
system and real foods, and thus bridges
the gap between stimuli that are usu-
ally not consumed and foods that are.
As a result, one can determine whether
functions obtained in simple systems
have applicability to the world in which
behavior takes place and whether the
parameters determined in the former
domain apply to the latter.

In a previous study by Moskowitz
(4) the sweetness-pleasantness relation
was reported for sugar plus water. The
method of magnitude estimation was
used in order to obtain ratio-scale values
for both sweetness and pleasantness.
For the same set of concentrations of
sugars, rated sweetness grew more rap-
idly than rated pleasantness, and up to
the sweetness of 1.OM glucose, pleas-

583

Sugar Sweetness and Pleasantness: Evidence for
Different Psychological Laws

Abstract. Sweetness and the pleasantness of sweetness of sucrose solutions and
sweetened food conform to different functions. Sweetness rises with concentration,
whereas pleasantness first rises and then decreases. The breakpoint appears to
occur at a constant sweetness (that is, constant sensory) level.


