data\Gustavson et al, 1976.pdfaccess_permission:can_modify: true
access_permission:extract_content: true
producer: PageGenie PDFGenerator
cp:subject: 
dc:title: PII: S0091-6773(76)90272-8
meta:save-date: 2004-09-17T12:35:38Z
Last-Modified: 2004-09-17T12:35:38Z
xmp:CreatorTool: 050029006.TIF
dcterms:created: 2004-08-19T18:05:58Z
access_permission:can_print: true
pdf:docinfo:subject: 
X-Parsed-By: 
org.apache.tika.parser.DefaultParser
org.apache.tika.parser.pdf.PDFParser
pdf:docinfo:creator: 
access_permission:extract_for_accessibility: true
access_permission:fill_in_form: true
pdf:encrypted: false
pdf:docinfo:producer: PageGenie PDFGenerator
dc:format: application/pdf; version=1.3
access_permission:can_print_degraded: true
Creation-Date: 2004-08-19T18:05:58Z
dc:subject: 
pdf:docinfo:creator_tool: 050029006.TIF
pdf:docinfo:modified: 2004-09-17T12:35:38Z
access_permission:assemble_document: true
subject: 
Keywords: 
pdf:docinfo:created: 2004-08-19T18:05:58Z
pdf:docinfo:keywords: 
Last-Save-Date: 2004-09-17T12:35:38Z
X-TIKA:parse_time_millis: 151
date: 2004-09-17T12:35:38Z
pdf:docinfo:title: PII: S0091-6773(76)90272-8
created: Thu Aug 19 11:05:58 PDT 2004
title: PII: S0091-6773(76)90272-8
modified: 2004-09-17T12:35:38Z
meta:creation-date: 2004-08-19T18:05:58Z
access_permission:modify_annotations: true
pdf:PDFVersion: 1.3
xmpTPg:NPages: 12
meta:keyword: 
dcterms:modified: 2004-09-17T12:35:38Z
Content-Type: application/pdf
!PDF_CONTENT!
--------------------------------











































PII: S0091-6773(76)90272-8


BEHAVIORAL BIOLOGY 17, 61-72 (1976), Abstract No. 5291 

Prey-Lithium Aversions. I: Coyotes and Wolves I 

CARL R. GUSTAVSON, DANIEL J. KELLY, and MICHAEL SWEENEY 

Department of Psychology, 
Eastern Washington State College 

and 

JOHN GARCIA 

Departments of Psychiatry and Psychology, 
University of California, Los Angeles 

Captive coyotes were fed rabbit flesh treated with lithium chloride 
(LiCI) and captive wolves were fed similarly treated sheep flesh. One or two 
treatments inhibited predatory attack upon the living prey, but left the 
appetite for alternative prey unaffected. A caged cougar refused to eat deer 
meat after one meal of venison laced with LiC1. Sheep flavored baits and 
sheep carcasses laced with LiC1, distributed on a 3000 acre sheep ranch in 
southeastern Washington, were consumed by feral coyotes. A comparison of 
this year's sheep losses with the rancher's past records suggested a 30-60% 
reduction in sheep killed by coyotes following this application of taste 
aversion conditioning in the field. 

Management of free-ranging predators seems inevitable when livestock is 
preyed upon by feral carnivores, but eradication of the offending animal may 
have undesirable repercussions. For example, eradication of the coyote, which 
sometimes acquires a taste for lambs, is almost sure to be followed by an 
increase in rodents who eat grain and carry plagues. Gustavson, Garcia, 
Hankins, and Rusiniak (1974) demonstrated that one or two meals of  the 
prey's flesh followed by illness induced by LiC1 injections will subsequently 
inhibit the coyote's attack upon living prey. However, the injection method is 
virtually useless for treating feral coyotes in the field. Therefore, we are 
reporting upon the aversive effects induced when predators voluntarily feed 
upon lithium-tainted carcasses and baits. 

1This research was supported by a research contraet from the Washington State 
Department of Agriculture, and research grants from the National Wildlife Federation, the 
National Audubon Society, and the New York Zoological Society, and USPHS-NIH grant 
number 1-R01-NS-11618. 

61 

Copyright © 1976 by Academic Press, Inc. 
All fights of reproduction in any form reserved. 



62 GUSTAVSON ETAL. 

Several questions with implications for learning theory as well as 
predator control were tested. (A)Will coyotes (Canis latrans) repeatedly 
consume lithium.tainted carcasses and baits until a stable aversion is formed? 
(B) Given multiple exposures to tainted flesh and living prey, will coyotes 
learn to discriminate between the two before an aversion for both is formed? 
(C) Will the aversion endure when the coyote is repeatedly offered a choice of 
prey? (D) We also tested two wolves (Canis lupus) for consumption of tainted 
sheep bait and subsequent attack upon live sheep; and we tested a cougar 
(Felis concolor) in the food aversion paradigm. 

In addition, field studies yielded limited information on these practical 
questions. (A)Will feral coyotes pick up lithium baits scattered in the field? 
(B) Are natural sheep flesh baits more likely to be consumed than processed 
dog food baits? (C)Will lithium baiting be followed by a reduction in sheep 
predation losses on the range? 

CAPTIVE ANIMAL METHODS AND RESULTS 

Before treatment. Four of  the coyotes (Josh, Draba, Pacer, and Meg) 
were 8-month-old littermates taken from their den as 3-week-old pups. Josh 
was the only male. Girl was a tame adult found in Utah and Annie was a feral 
adult trapped in Washington. They were about 3 yr old. Only Annie and Josh 
would attack the large lambs or sheep available in the fall of  the year, so we 
used rabbits and chickens as our test prey. Girl would not kill or eat chickens 
so canned dog food was substituted. 

They were all kept in individual cages (1.2 × 3 × 1.8 m high) at the base 
of  our choice arena, which was essentially a funnel of chain-link fence 
converging from the array of home cages to a choice point 25 m away. The 
choice point was flanked by two goal pens (2 × 2 m) with doors. The pen on 
the right contained a tethered rabbit and the pen on the left a tethered 
chicken. The coyotes were deprived of food for 48 hr and tested every 48 hr 
or more throughout the experiment. On Days 1, 3, 5, and 7 they were tested 
with both rabbit and chicken. Three coyotes (Josh, Draba, and Pacer) 
immediately attacked both prey in the choice arena and took them back to 
their home cage to eat. Girl killed the rabbit, took it to the canned food goal 
box, ate the dog food, and then returned to her home cage with the rabbit to 
eat. Annie and Meg would not perform in the arena, so chickens and rabbits 
were thrust into their home cages. They killed and ate both prey on all 4 
days. 

The two yearling wolves, Tom (male) and Sissy (female), were always 
tested together. They immediately attacked, killed, and fed on sheep in two 
tests. They also killed and ate rabbits twice. The elderly male cougar (Fred) 
was not tested with living prey. He was deprived of food for 24 hr and fed 



PREY-LITHIUM AVERSIONS IN COYOTES AND WOLVES 63 

TABLE 1 

Attacks (A) and Refusals (0) upon Prey before and after One or Two 
Treatments of Prey Flesh Mixed with LiC1 a 

Prey flesh 

Tests before Tests after 
Treated 

Rabbit Chicken with LiC1 Rabbit Chicken 

Coyote 
1. Josh 
2. Draba 
3. Girl 
4. A. Pacer 

B. Pacer 
5. Annie b 
6. A. Meg b 

B. Meg 

Wolf 
7. Tom 
8. Sissy 

AAAA AAAA Rabbit (2) 0000000 AAAAAAA 
AAAA AAAA Rabbit (2) 0000000 AAAAAAA 
AAAA (dog food) Rabbit (1) 000000000 (dog food) 
AAAA AAAA Rabbit (2) 0 A 
(after becoming sick on chicken) 00000 00000 
AAAA AAAA Rabbit (2) 000000000 AAAAAAAAA 
AAAA AAAA Rabbit (2) A A A A A A  AAAAAA 
(tested in choice arena) 0 A 

Sheep Rabbit Sheep Rabbit 

AA AA Sheep (1) 0 A 
AA AA Sheep (1) 0 A 

Deer  Horse/cow D e e r  Horse/cow 
meat meat meat meat 

Cougar 

9. Fred b Eats Eats Deer meat (1) 0 Eats 

aCoyotes weret offered simultaneous choice of prey, other species were offered prey 
successively. Each animal was tested only once on any given day with several days usually 
intervening between tests. 

bTested in home cage. 

ground venison. A mixture of cow and horse meat was his usual diet. The 

before treatment conditions and results are summarized in Table 1 (columns 1 
and 2). 

Treatment. Since the coyotes favored rabbit, we treated that prey with 
lithium in two ways. (A) Rabbit-bait packages consisted of LiC1 (3 g in 32 #5 
cellulose-acetate-coated gelatin capsules) and Top Choice dog food (340 g), 
mixed together and sewn into a fresh rabbi t  hide. (B) Rabbit carcasses were 
injected in the legs, abdomen, throat, and head with LiC1 (6 g/50 ml tap 

water). Bait packages induced vomiting in about 90 rain, carcasses in about 
30 min. No coyote received more than two treatments. 

On Day 9, Josh and Draba ate rabbit-bait packages and vomited. On 
Day 11, they were tested in the choice arena. They both killed their rabbits, 
but refused to eat them. Josh urinated on his dead rabbit. They both then 



64 GUSTAVSON ETAL. 

killed and ate their chickens. On Day 13, Josh and Draba were given a lithium 
rabbit carcass. They were finicky about the fur, but soon ate the tainted 
rabbit and became ill. It should be noted that they were 48 hr food-deprived 
and had no other food choice. 

Girl consumed a rabbit carcass and became ill on Day 9. On Day 11, she 
first ran to the rabbit and sniffed it thoroughly. Leaving it unharmed, she ran 
over, ate the dog food, and returned to her cage. She received no further 
lithium treatments. Pacer ate a lithium rabbit carcass on Day 9, and vomited. 
She was then given two choice tests. On Day 11 she attacked and consumed 
the chicken, leaving the rabbit alive. But on Day 13, she attacked and 
consumed the rabbit, leaving the chicken alive. So, on Day 15, she was given 
another lithium rabbit carcass which made her ill. 

Annie and Meg were not given a choice test after their first lithium 
carcass on Day 9. Rather, they were given dog food on Day 11 and a lithium 
bait on Day 13, to determine whether a coyote that has fed on a lithium 
carcass will subsequently consume a lithium bait. Both coyotes readily ate the 
bait and became ill. 

The wolves were each given one 360 g bait package consisting of sheep 
flesh and LiC1 (6.0 g in coated capsules) wrapped in fresh woolly sheep hide. 
The cougar was given one 720 g meal of minced deer meat containing LiC1 
(6.0 g in coated capsules). Table 1 (column 3) summarizes the treatments. 

After treatment. The results of after treatment tests are shown in Table 
1, columns 4 and 5. Josh and Draba refused to attack rabbits but took 
chickens on Days 15, 17, 19, 21, 23, 27, and 85. Girl refused to attack 
rabbits but ate dog food on Days 11, 13, 15, 17, 19, 21, 27, 32, and 39. On 
Day 17, Pacer refused to attack the rabbit but ate a chicken, inadvertently 
sprayed with a pesticide. She became ill, vomiting 30 min later. She refused to 
attack either chickens or rabbits on Days 19, 21, 23, 25, and 27. She was fed 
dry dog food after each test. 

Annie refused to attack rabbits but attacked and ate chickens thrust 
into her home cage on Days 15, 17, 19, 21, 23, 27, 32, 39, and 85. On the 
other hand, Meg, who was treated identically, killed the rabbits but refused to 
eat them; she killed and ate chickens on Days 15, 17, 19, 21, 23, and 27. It 
seemed to us that Meg might be defending her territorial home cage against 
the intruding rabbit. Therefore, on Day 29, we placed her in the choice arena 
with a tethered rabbit and a tethered chicken in the goal pens. We concealed 
ourselves and observed from a distance. Meg repeatedly advanced to the 
choice area and then retreated to her home cage. Finally she investigated both 
prey; then, without harming the rabbit, she killed the chicken and took it 
home to eat. 

The wolves (Tom and Sissy) were tested once with an adult sheep. They 
repeatedly charged but seemed reluctant to seize it in their jaws. Twice they 
tugged at its flank, causing the sheep to go down, but they refused to bite 
again. Subsequently they played with the sheep in the youthful manner of 



PREY-LITHIUM AVERSIONS IN COYOTES AND WOLVES 65 

puppies without so much as nipping it. After a few minutes the sheep began 
to make short threatening charges and the wolves submissively gave way. 
Gradually the distance between the sheep and the wolves increased as the 
sheep progressively dominated the gamboling interactions. After an hour, live 
rabbits were tossed into the enclosure and the wolves ate them, leaving the 
sheep unharmed. 

The cougar (Fred) was offered 720 g of deer meat without LiC1. He 
sniffed and mouthed the meat, then bit the rim of the pan, and turned it 
over. He continued to sniff and taste chunks of meat, always dropping them 
without eating. Finally, he walked to his water bowl and drank. His abdomen 
contracted in brief retches. He returned to the meat, reexamined it, and then 
walked away, shaking each paw in rotation as cats do when they step in 
water. 

FIELD STUDY METHODS 

We tested the acceptability of our baits to coyotes in Turnbull National 
Wildlife Refuge where signs of free ranging coyotes were evident. Eight 
untreated packets of sheep meat (454 g) sewn into sheep hide and three sterile 
baits enclosed in plastic were distributed at five 8 × 8 m smooth-dirt stations. 
The untreated baits appeared to maintain their sheep flavor for at least 3 
weeks. 

Tracks in the dirt indicated that all bait packages without plastic were 
taken by coyotes within 19 days, with peak activity occurring between 6 and 
11 days. Plastic-covered baits were not taken;however, tracks indicated that 
coyotes investigated them. When we removed the plastic, the baits were 
picked up in the next day or so. Coyotes apparently carried the baits some 
distance before consuming them. We followed one coyote's tracks approxi- 
mately 4 km after it had picked up a bait without encountering any sign of 
consumption. We found the remains of only one bait. Bits of wool were 
found scattered about with no sign of hide or flesh remaining. Similar remains 
were observed when our captive coyotes consumed baits. Signs near the sites 
indicated that some coyotes passed by the stations without investigating the 
baits. Perhaps only those with a taste for sheep or those habituated to man's 
scent picked up baits. 

Linhart, Brusman, and Balsar (1968) found that other species often took 
their small tallow coyote baits, but our baits proved to be remarkably coyote 
specific. Striped skunks (Mephitis mephitis), weasels (Mustela fenata), badgers 
(Taxidea taxus), bobcats (Lynx rufus), and other scavengers and predators 
inhabited our study area. However, only magpies (Pica pica) were recorded at 
the bait stations. They pulled small tufts of wool from the baits, occasionally 
turning them over, but they never penetrated the hide. 



66 GUSTAVSON ETAL. 

Sheep ranch study area. Our lithium bait and sheep predation studies 
were carried out on a 3000 acre ranch in the channeled scablands of 
southeastern Washington State, where low rolling hills are cut by small 
canyons and lava buttes. The ranch is bounded on the south by the Palouse 
River and on the north by State Highway 26. Rock Creek bisects the ranch 
from north to south and, like the Palouse, is a partial barrier to coyote 
movement, particularly from January through May. The dominant vegetation 
is bunch grass (Agropvron sp), blue grass (Poa sp) and cheat grass (Bromus 
sp). Pines (Pinus ponderosa) are sparsely scattered. A modified maritime 
climate prevails with most precipitation occurring during the cold winter 
months. 

Prior to baiting, coyotes were frequently observed singly or in groups of 
two or three. Fresh tracks and scats were common along trails and fence lines. 
A trap survey found a high count of 276 rodents per acre, indicating an 
abundant source of prey. Two large open carcass dumps appeared to be 
regular feeding sites for coyotes also. About 365 ewes and 160 lambs from 
the previous year spent the winter in the eastern section of the ranch. Two 
weeks prior to lambing, the pregnant ewes were released onto pastures near 
their winter grazing area. 

Lithium baits. On January 27, 1975, 12 bait stations were established 
throughout the ranch along fence lines, at gates, at the carcass dumps, and 
wherever fresh signs of coyote movement were apparent. Baits consisting of 
340 g of Top Choice dog food containing 6 g of LiC1 were wrapped and 
stapled in a fresh piece of unsheared hide (25.4 × 15.2 cm). Initially, two to 
four baits comprised a bait station. Later, relatively fresh sheep carcasses from 
natural losses were moved to a bait station or left in place and treated with 
lithium. Carcasses were injected throughout with a solution of LiCI (82.4 g/1 
water) so that a coyote feeding on any part would consume at least some 
LiC1. The injection device was a 17.8 cm meat-pump needle connected with 
surgical tubing to a Tiguvon Spotton gun (Chemagro, Australia). When 
carcasses were too decomposed for injection, they were sprayed thoroughly 
with the LiC1 solution from a commercial 5 gal weed sprayer. Ultimately, all 
carcasses (18 ewes and 74 lambs), including those in the dump, were treated 
with lithium. Bait stations were checked every 24-72 hr. Missing baits were 
replaced and the area was examined for tracks and remains by walking out in 
concentric circles from the station. Coyote feeding on baits was recorded 
when a bait was disturbed or missing and; (1) if the remains resembled those 
left by our captive coyotes or (2 ) i f  coyote tracks, scats or vomitus were 
evident. Coyote feeding on LiCl-laced carcasses was determined by similar 
examinations and photographed. In most cases, it was impossible to determine 
if a carcass feeding was due to one or more coyotes. Hence, each new 
evidence of feeding was scored as one unit. 

Coyote activity. We searched for coyotes and fresh tracks virtually every 



PREY-LITHIUM AVERSIONS IN COYOTES AND WOLVES 67 

day, particularly at dawn and dusk. Snow on the ground, refreshed by 
periodic storms through early April, facilitated tracking. Each datum is 
independent, i.e., tracks were not counted when the coyote making them was 
sighted. Each fresh set of tracks and its projections was recorded as one unit 
and noted to prevent duplication on succeeding days. Over days, a single 
coyote could contribute one or more data units, hence the cumulative record 
is not a coyote census but rather a rough index of coyote activity in the 
study area over time. 

SHEEP RANGE RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

Bait consumption. Figure 1 illustrates the cumulative weekly number of 
Top Choice bait pick-ups, lithium carcass feedings, and coyote activity (actual 
sightings plus fresh track observations). Initially coyote activity and bait 
consumption were high by all three indices, then all indices declined, as if the 
coyotes had been averted and left the study area. After about 8 weeks no Top 
Choice baits required replacing. The remaining baits were left in place 
throughout the study period. In early April, coyote activity sharply increased 
again, and feedings on lithium carcasses increased. After 2 weeks, coyote 
activity again declined abruptly, followed by a more gradual cessation of 
carcass feedings. 

Sheep predation. Evaluation of predation losses proved to be contro- 
versial. A "placebo" study in which saline-treated baits were scattered on a 
comparable ranch would have simplified interpretation but seemed impractical. 
Unpoisoned baits would be likely to increase lamb predation by attracting 
predators and cultivating a taste for lamb. Thus, given our limited resources, 
we had to compare this year's losses with previous losses on the same range. 

Z 

O 

>- 
._.1 
v 
I I I  
I I I  

3: 

:D 
U 

60 C..-. COYOTE ACTIVITY .- 
.. .." 

4 0  " f  " ..... ~ ' ~  o ° ° O ~ O O ~  
I°°°.° oo°° ,( / -  

20  . . ~  

°°o~°° ° 

I i 
FEB MAR 

SHEEP CARCASS FEEDINGS 
TOP C H O I C E  ..................... 

| I I 
APR M A Y  15 

Fig. 1. Coyote field study. Cumulative feedings upon lithium treated sheep carcas- 
ses, and Top Choice-lithium baits wrapped in raw sheep hides and concurrent activity of 
free-ranging coyotes. Note the terminal plateaus in the feeding curves. 



68 GUSTAVSON ETAL.  

These records were maintained each year on a monthly basis, since accurate 
records of profit and loss are essential for business and income tax puposes. 

Procedures for establishing a coyote "kill" were agreed upon. Rigorous 
criteria for a "kill" include puncture wounds on the neck, dried blood on the 
wool, and other indicators of  hemorrhaging (Davenport et  al., 1973). Only 
five ewe and 10 lamb remains in 1975 fulfilled this criteria. However, since we 
were using the rancher's past records for comparison we also used his less 
stringent criteria, which included virtually any newly discovered piece of 
carcass marked with canid scavenging. Sheep remains were examined by a 
total of five observers, the rancher, a herder, and three researchers. The 
remains were described in notes, photographed in most cases, and then treated 
with lithium. Each finding was checked to determine if it matched a previous 
finding in location, gross anatomy, coloration, or conformation of hooves and 
pads. All evidence was examined by two or more observers with the following 
exceptions. One determination of a "kill" (April 5) was made by the rancher 
alone. A similar determination (April 15) was made by a single researcher. 
Traces of  these remains could not be located by other observers. Data 
gathering proceeded smoothly until on or about April 10, when a sharp 
disagreement over judgments of kills erupted between the rancher and 
researchers. On April 15, the rancher reported two kills, saying he disposed of 
the remains, in violation of established procedures. From this date on, there 
were more disagreements. Nine remains judged to be kills by the rancher were 
judged to be previously counted kills by the researchers. On May 15, an intact 
lamb carcass was recovered. The rancher judged it as a coyote kill. The 
researchers judged it as death from other causes with some marks of minor 
avian scavenging. This controversy resulted in a decision by the researchers to 
terminate the study. Subsequently, at a hearing held by the Washington State 
Department of Agriculture on June 12, 1975, the rancher reported a total of 
10 coyote kills in May. 

Figure 2 illustrates the rancher's scoring of cumulative kills on a 
monthly basis. His previous records for 1972, 1973, and 1974 were remark- 
ably constant from February 1 through May 30. His 1975 losses for the same 
period were approximately 30% lower and appeared generally decelerated in 
May, when coyote predation was reportedly very high in previous years. On 
the other hand, the researcher's data indicate approximately a 60% drop in 
losses as of May 15 (compare Fig. 2 and 3). Research methods, i.e., field 
notes, photography, and care to avoid "duplicate kills," all operate to make 
the researchers' count lower than the rancher's count in previous years, as well 
as in 1975. However, the constant searching of ravines and brushy areas by 
three additional observers operates to increase the number of recorded kills. In 
any case, both the rancher's and researchers' claims indicate a substantial 
savings for 1975. 

Comparison of kills with coyote sightings offers another check on 



PREY-LITHIUM AVERSIONS IN COYOTES AND WOLVES 69 

8O 
tO .._.1 ._.1 

6G 
>- 

Z 
0 
~ 2O 

u 

---- ~, & RANGE 1972, 73, 74 t 
1975 RANCHER'S RECORDS / / /  t / 

/ 

/ / / / ~  

I | I 

JAN FEB MAR APR MAY 

Fig. 2. Coyote sheep predation, rancher's data: The 1975 cumulative sheep losses 
as recorded by the rancher are compared with his previous monthly losses. Note slope 
differences in March and May 1975 where researchers' curves plateau (see Fig. 3). 

predation count accuracy. Figure 3 illustrates the researchers' records. Actual 
sightings of  coyotes, rather than coyote activity, is more reliable because the 
snow stopped in April, making tracking a changing function during the 
lambing season. Both graphs show the initial spurt in February and the 
plateau in March, as observed in the bait data. Sightings rose precipitously 
again in the first of  April, accompanied by a more prolonged and gradual rise 
in scored lamb kills. From April 11 to May 15, no coyotes were sighted, and 
the rate of  researcher-scored kills gradually declined also. After April 26, the 
researchers saw fresh evidence for only two kills. These occurred on May 3 
and 4 just after the herd was moved into new territory across Rock Creek. 
Coyote tracks were discovered in this area on April 28. After April 16, except 
for the kills of  May 4 and 5, all kills scored by researchers were based on old 
carcass remnants. Thus, if the kills could be back-dated to actual time of  
death, the changes in slope in the cumulative kill count would probably 
coincide even more closely within the cumulative sightings of  the foraging 
coyotes. 

Z 

O 
U 
i i i  
>. 

.< 

.._1 

Z3 
U 

60 

40 

20 

___ COYOTE SIGHTINGS 

KILLS (RESEARCHER) 

/ 
I 

._j l  

.s--~s-ml f ,,p 

/ , - . " " F  I I 
FEB MAR APR MAY 

Fig. 3, Coyote sheep predation, researchers' data: Cumulative count of 1975 lamb 
and sheep kills along with visual sightings of coyotes. Note the terminal plateaus on both 
curves in May which is normally a month of high loss rate. 



70 GUSTAVSON E T A L .  

GENERAL DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 

A two phase process for mammalian food-illness conditioning has been 
proposed (Garcia, Clarke, and Hankins, 1973). In phase one, the taste of the 
food, or prey in this case, becomes aversive when paired with illness once or 
perhaps twice. However, at this point the distal cues, i.e., the sight, sound, or 
smell of the prey, may still elicit approach and attack. In phase two, these 
distal cues become associated with the now aversive taste and inhibit 
subsequent approach and attack. Our coyotes killed rabbits once or twice 
after they would no longer eat them. However, killing was then inhibited 
without further treatment, supporting the two phase hypothesis. One coyote 
(Girl) and the two wolves refused to kill their prey after a single treatment. 
This appears to contradict the two phase hypothesis. However, when the 
coyotes were tested with living prey, they often appeared to actually contact 
the prey with their muzzles and then break contact abruptly. The wolves 
pulled wool from the sheep. Similarly, the cougar mouthed his deer meat and 
then dropped it. In addition, recall that these animals vomited, thus experi- 
encing the taste and smell of the aversive flesh together. In effect, the distance 
receptors, including olfaction, learn from the taste analyzers whether any 
attractive substance is fit to eat. While animals can associate distal cues 
directly with internal malaise, the avoidance reactions are relatively weak 
compared to the taste aversion (Garcia, Kimeldorf, and Hunt, 1960). 

Extinction of a food aversion is a reconditioning process. In a previous 
study, hungry coyotes without an alternative prey began the process by killing 
the aversive rabbit and gingerly nibbling on the carcass, subsequently returning 
to eat more and more in repeated bouts (Gustavson, Garcia, Hankins, and 
Rusiniak, 1974). Recuperation from nutritional deficits or toxicosis enhances 
the flavor of the meal, counteracting the aversion (Garcia, Hankins, and 
Rusiniak, 1974). In the present study, in which the natural niche was 
mimicked more closely, coyotes went for many weeks without extinction of 
the rabbit aversion because they were given an alternative prey in a hunting 
area and a lair (home cage) to retreat to for consumption. 

Our observations of lithium aversions in captive coyotes and wolves led 
us to predict that lithium baits scattered in the field would induce a rapid rate 
of bait consumption initially followed by rapid deceleration and cessation of 
bait pick-ups. The data from the first of February through the first 3 weeks of 
March conform to these expectations rather well, particularly the consumption 
of Top Choice baits and signs of coyote activity. Sheep baits and sheep kills 
also decelerated during this period. 

Around the first of April, an unexpected acceleration appeared, partic- 
ularly in actual coyote sighting, followed by an abrupt cessation of sightings. 
This was accompanied by a more gradual acceleration then deceleration in 
carcass feedings and sheep kills. The differences in slope changes may be due, 



PREY-LITHIUM AVERSIONS IN COYOTES AND WOLVES 71 

in part, to the fact that coyotes were observed discretely in "real" time while 
feedings and kills are discovered after the fact, on periodic searches. 

Two post hoc hypotheses are offered to account for the resurgence o f  
coyote activity in April. First, the original coyotes on the ranch became 
averted to sheep because of  lithium treatment and then vacated the sheep 
range just as our captive predators avoided the aversive sheep in the pens. 
Later a second group of  coyotes moved onto the ranch and began feeding on 
carcasses and killing lambs. Top Choice baits were not picked up because they 
had been on the ground too long, changing them in some unknown way. 
Second, it is conceivable that the original coyotes became averted, then 
stopped their bait consumption, carcass feeding, and killing for several weeks. 
Later they refused any more Top Choice baits, but returned to carcass feeding 
and lamb killing. Finally, further lithium consumption averted them to carcass 
feeding and killing. This possibility causes us to urge caution in the use of  
artificial baits which might be discriminated from sheep flesh. Our captive 
coyotes did not make this discrimination because they were given a sufficient 
dose to produce a generalized aversion which included live prey as well as 
prey flesh. 

Our observations on captive animals lead us to favor the first hypothesis 
of  two successive groups of  coyotes. We saw no sign o f  extinction in our 
captive animals, even when three coyotes were tested 72 days after their last 
lithium treatment. Furthermore, when a relatively small sheep ranch is treated 
with lithium baits, there is always a chance that nawe transient coyotes will 
continue to enter the treated range; thus effective suppression of  predation 
may require lithium bait saturation of  an extensive region. Lithium chloride is 
a mildly toxic salt commonly found in earth and water, so this program 
would not excessively pollute the range, though it would suppress scavenging 
of  sheep carcasses by vultures and other species. More field research, ideally 
with positive identification of  individual feral coyotes, is needed. This may be 
possible with live prey confined to stations at times and places suitable for 
observation. Thus, the course of  the aversion could be sampled in free-ranging 
predators. 

REFERENCES 

Davenport, J. W., Bowns, J. E., Workman, J. P., and Nielsen, D. B. (1973). Assessment of 
sheep losses. In F. H. Wagner (P. I.) "Predator Control Study," pp. 3-17. Contract 
FCRC No. 621-366-044, Final Report, Four Corners Regional Commission, Utah 
State University, Logan, Utah. 

Garcia, J., Clarke, J. C., and Hankins, W. G. (1973). Natural responses to scheduled 
rewards. In P. P. G. Bateson and P. Klopfer (Eds.), "Perspectives in Ethology," pp. 
1-41. New York: Plenum Press. 

Gaxcia, J., Hankins, W. G., and Ru~niak, K. W. (1974). Behavioral regulation of the 
milieu interne in man and rat. Science 185, 824-831. 



72 GUSTAVSON ETAL. 

Garcia, J., Kimeldorf, D., and Hunt, E. (1960). The use of ionizing radiation as a 
motivating stimulus. Psychol. Rev. 68, 384-394. 

Gustavson, C. R., Garcia, J., Hankins, W. G., and Rusiniak, K. W. (1974). Coyote 
predation control by aversive conditioning. Science 184, 581-583. 

Linhaxt, S. B., Brusman, H. D., and Balsar, D. S. (1968). An antifertility agent for 
inhibiting coyote reproduction. "Transactions of the 33rd North American Wildlife 
and Natural Resources Conference," 1, pp. 316-327. 


