../data\Pfeifer & Goos, 1982.pdfaccess_permission:can_modify: true
access_permission:extract_content: true
producer: SPDF
Author: William K. Pfeifer and Michael W. Goos
dc:title: GUARD DOGS AND GAS EXPLODERS AS COYOTE DEPREDATION CONTROL TOOLS IN NORTH DAKOTA
meta:save-date: 2013-11-06T19:04:56Z
Last-Modified: 2013-11-06T19:04:56Z
xmp:CreatorTool: Appligent APSetDocInfo 2.2.2
dcterms:created: 2013-11-06T19:04:56Z
access_permission:can_print: true
meta:author: William K. Pfeifer and Michael W. Goos
pdf:docinfo:custom:Appligent: APSetDocInfo 2.2.2 Jan 16 2008
X-Parsed-By: 
org.apache.tika.parser.DefaultParser
org.apache.tika.parser.pdf.PDFParser
pdf:docinfo:creator: William K. Pfeifer and Michael W. Goos
access_permission:extract_for_accessibility: true
access_permission:fill_in_form: true
pdf:encrypted: false
pdf:docinfo:producer: SPDF
creator: William K. Pfeifer and Michael W. Goos
pdf:docinfo:custom:SPDF: 1122.1
dc:format: application/pdf; version=1.6
access_permission:can_print_degraded: true
Creation-Date: 2013-11-06T19:04:56Z
pdf:docinfo:creator_tool: Appligent APSetDocInfo 2.2.2
SPDF: 1122.1
pdf:docinfo:modified: 2013-11-06T19:04:56Z
access_permission:assemble_document: true
pdf:docinfo:created: 2013-11-06T19:04:56Z
Last-Save-Date: 2013-11-06T19:04:56Z
X-TIKA:parse_time_millis: 200
date: 2013-11-06T19:04:56Z
Appligent: APSetDocInfo 2.2.2 Jan 16 2008
pdf:docinfo:title: GUARD DOGS AND GAS EXPLODERS AS COYOTE DEPREDATION CONTROL TOOLS IN NORTH DAKOTA
created: Wed Nov 06 11:04:56 PST 2013
dc:creator: William K. Pfeifer and Michael W. Goos
modified: 2013-11-06T19:04:56Z
meta:creation-date: 2013-11-06T19:04:56Z
access_permission:modify_annotations: true
pdf:PDFVersion: 1.6
xmpTPg:NPages: 8
title: GUARD DOGS AND GAS EXPLODERS AS COYOTE DEPREDATION CONTROL TOOLS IN NORTH DAKOTA
dcterms:modified: 2013-11-06T19:04:56Z
Content-Type: application/pdf
!PDF_CONTENT!
--------------------------------












































GUARD DOGS AND GAS EXPLODERS AS COYOTE DEPREDATION CONTROL TOOLS IN NORTH DAKOTA


University of Nebraska - Lincoln
DigitalCommons@University of Nebraska - Lincoln
Proceedings of the Tenth Vertebrate Pest
Conference (1982) Vertebrate Pest Conference Proceedings collection

2-23-1982

GUARD DOGS AND GAS EXPLODERS AS
COYOTE DEPREDATION CONTROL
TOOLS IN NORTH DAKOTA
William K. Pfeifer
Animal Damage Control, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Bismarck, North Dakota

Michael W. Goos
Animal Damage Control, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Bismarck, North Dakota

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/vpc10
Part of the Environmental Health and Protection Commons

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Vertebrate Pest Conference Proceedings collection at DigitalCommons@University of
Nebraska - Lincoln. It has been accepted for inclusion in Proceedings of the Tenth Vertebrate Pest Conference (1982) by an authorized administrator
of DigitalCommons@University of Nebraska - Lincoln.

Pfeifer, William K. and Goos, Michael W., "GUARD DOGS AND GAS EXPLODERS AS COYOTE DEPREDATION CONTROL
TOOLS IN NORTH DAKOTA" (1982). Proceedings of the Tenth Vertebrate Pest Conference (1982). Paper 36.
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/vpc10/36

http://digitalcommons.unl.edu?utm_source=digitalcommons.unl.edu%2Fvpc10%2F36&utm_medium=PDF&utm_campaign=PDFCoverPages
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/vpc10?utm_source=digitalcommons.unl.edu%2Fvpc10%2F36&utm_medium=PDF&utm_campaign=PDFCoverPages
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/vpc10?utm_source=digitalcommons.unl.edu%2Fvpc10%2F36&utm_medium=PDF&utm_campaign=PDFCoverPages
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/vpccollection?utm_source=digitalcommons.unl.edu%2Fvpc10%2F36&utm_medium=PDF&utm_campaign=PDFCoverPages
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/vpc10?utm_source=digitalcommons.unl.edu%2Fvpc10%2F36&utm_medium=PDF&utm_campaign=PDFCoverPages
http://network.bepress.com/hgg/discipline/172?utm_source=digitalcommons.unl.edu%2Fvpc10%2F36&utm_medium=PDF&utm_campaign=PDFCoverPages
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/vpc10/36?utm_source=digitalcommons.unl.edu%2Fvpc10%2F36&utm_medium=PDF&utm_campaign=PDFCoverPages


GUARD DOGS AND GAS EXPLODERS AS COYOTE DEPREDATION CONTROL 
TOOLS IN NORTH DAKOTA 
 
WILLIAM K. PFEIFER and MICHAEL W. GOOS, Animal Damage Control, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, 
Bismarck, North Dakota 58501 

ABSTRACT: Guard dogs and gas exploders have been successfully used in North Dakota to protect sheep 
from coyote (Canis latrans) depredation since the mid-1970s. They have been used in addition to other 
lethal and nonlethal control tools. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service gathered information from field 
testing and landowner interviews to measure their effectiveness. Guard dogs reduced the rate of 
depredation by 93 percent on the 36 ranches surveyed. Gas exploders deterred coyotes from depredating 
on 30 ranches an average of 31 days during the 1980 and 1981 grazing seasons. An increasing number of 
sheep producers are using these control methods to reduce losses and become less dependent on a publicly 
funded damage control program. 

INTRODUCTION 
People in the sheep industry and animal damage control personnel generally agree that a variety of 

control methods are needed to obtain best results in reducing sheep losses caused by predators. The 
most desirable methods should be effective, economical, and environmentally safe. The recent need to 
test additional methods stemmed from public concern over the nature and extent of predator control 
activities, the ban on the use of toxicants, and economic restraints. 

Since the mid-1970s the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Animal Damage Control (ADC) field personnel 
in North Dakota have used, or encouraged the use of, nonlethal methods to help reduce coyote depredation 
of sheep. Guard dogs and propane exploders have been demonstrated to be successful methods of reducing 
depredation in North Dakota. The following describes the results obtained from the use of guard dogs 
and exploders. This report does not endorse one breed of dog or brand of exploder over another. 
GUARD DOGS 

Coyote depredation on some ranches in North Dakota is a problem. Where it occurs, depredation can 
greatly reduce or eliminate the income from a sheep operation. At least 36 North Dakota sheep producers 
are now using guard dogs to reduce coyote depredation. 

The concept of using dogs to guard sheep and other livestock from predators is an ancient one and 
can be traced back to many centuries B.C. in Eurasia (Bordeaux 1974). Guard dogs were first brought to 
the Americas with the Spanish conquistadors to help protect their flocks (Lyman 1844). These guard dogs 
were commonly seen with large flocks of sheep in South America (Darwin 1839). Apparently, the Spanish 
dogs did not persist into the 20th century as a result of inbreeding with indigenous Indian dogs (Black 
1981). 

Guard dogs are still being used in Europe and, although there are a dozen or so traditional guard 
dog breeds, they share the same basic behaviors. These dogs travel with the flock, stay with them day 
and night, and are an effective defense against would-be predators (Coppinger and Coppinger 1978). The 
dogs are bred to be large, placid, powerful, courageous, and loyal to their masters and flocks. 

Prior to the mid-1970s, most individual dogs of guard dog breeds in the United States existed only 
as show dogs or as family pets. Of these breeds, the Great Pyrenees was the most available. The 
Komondor and Kuvasz were less available and the Italian Maremma, Yugoslavian Shar Planinetz, and the 
Turkish Karabash existed in low numbers. 

Research on the use of guard dogs began in 1976 when Dr. Samuel Linhart, Denver Wildlife Research 
Center, began a short study of Komondor dogs and their behavior. Four Komondor dogs, used in pairs, 
were studied during the 1976 grazing season. The Komondor dogs had been trained to attack captive 
coyotes and to stay within fenced sheep pastures. The dogs were evaluated on three ranches (two in 
North Dakota and one in Montana) in pastures of 26-134 hectares (65-330 acres) in size, to determine 
their potential in protecting sheep from coyote depredation. Service personnel made daily checks of 
sheep losses on each ranch for three consecutive 20-day periods: preceding placement of the dogs, 
during their time in pastures, and after their removal. Sheep kills by coyotes decreased significantly 
during and following the use of dogs, suggesting some potential for the deterrence of coyote depredation 
under fenced-grazing conditions (Linhart et al. 1979). 

Guard dog research is now conducted primarily at two locations: the U.S. Sheep Experiment Station 
(USSES), USDA Agricultural Research Service in Dubois, Idaho; and the Hampshire College's New England 
Farm Center (NEFC) in Amherst, Massachusetts. Research on livestock guard dogs began at USSES in the 
fall of 1977; since then over 50 individual dogs have been studied. Most of the dogs have been reared 
and observed at the USSES; over 25 have been placed with cooperating sheep producers in various western 
states. Approximately 60 percent of the dogs studies were rated as good-to-excellent with respect to 
performance in remaining with sheep and significantly reducing predation. Only one of the dogs studied 
was considered a complete failure. The success rate of the dogs that were acquired, trained, and worked 
in the last 2 years of the study was greater; over 75 percent were rated good-to-excellent. The 
 
 
1982. Proceedings Tenth Vertebrate Pest Conference             55 
(R.E. Marsh, Ed.), Univ. of California, Davis, Calif.                               

                                                                         



increased success was due to improved dog-rearing techniques and the placement of dogs into operations 
suited to their temperament and abilities (Green 1981). 

Researchers at NEFC have placed over 70 guard dogs with sheep ranchers across the country and most 
produced good results (Coppinger, L. and Coppinger 1980). They are studying five breeds under direct 
observation and exchange available information with livestock producers who are using dogs of these 
breeds (Coppinger, R. and Coppinger 1980). 

In 1981 there were 36 known ranchers in North Dakota that had 52 Great Pyrenees (44 working and 8 
training) and 2 working Komondor dogs. These ranchers were exposed to the idea by media articles, 
Linhart's study, and most frequently through a neighbor, relative, or friend. Generally the dogs were 
worked in the western half of the states, an area characterized by open range, wooded draws, rolling 
hills, brush, wetlands, and a large coyote population. Most of the statewide sheep depredation occurred 
in this area. Ranchers placed sheep in pastures during the spring through fall grazing season and kept 
them near ranch headquarters during the winter months. 
OBSERVATIONS 

Our 1981 study found that some ranchers have been using guard dogs since 1976. All of the 36 
ranchers interviewed used Great Pyrenees, one rancher used both Great Pyrenees and Komondor dogs, and 
one rancher had used Komondor dogs prior to our study. We have no knowledge of any other breeds being 
used. The Great Pyrenees were preferred by the two ranchers who used both Komondor and Great Pyrenees 
dogs because they (1) were less possessive, (2) were easier to work with, (3) were more mobile, (4) are 
easier to breed, and (5) seemed to mature and start working at an earlier age. The USSES study also 
observed the apparent earlier working ability of the Great Pyrenees. In the USSES study, the Great 
Pyrenees matured at an earlier age than the Komondor dogs, which reached behavioral maturity at 18 to 30 
months of age (Green and Woodruff 1981). In North Dakota the average age at which the 44 Great Pyrenees 
studied began working effectively was 6 months. The age of these Great Pyrenees averaged 2.5 years.  
The age of the two Komondor dogs was 7 years. 

The Komondor dogs worked in a 65 hectare (160 acre) pasture and guarded 400 ewes and lambs.  The 
Great Pyrenees worked in pastures of 4-486 hectares (10-1200 acres) with sheep flocks of 10-1300 animals. 
The typical Great Pyrenees dog guarded an average flock of 590 sheep in a 101 hectare (250 acre) pasture. 
Larger pastures and flocks were generally guarded by two or more dogs. 

The annual rate of depredation before use of dogs on the 36 ranches surveyed ranged from 0-21 
percent and averaged 6 percent of the flock. This was much higher than the annual statewide average of 
0.3 percent. Average depredation rate after use of guard dogs was 0.4 percent, a 93 percent reduction. 
Normal ADC operations were conducted on or in the vicinity of the ranches before and after implementation 
of guard dogs. Most of the losses took place in cases where the dog was under 6 months old, the dog was 
ill, the rancher had the sheep scattered in several different pastures, or the dog wandered too far 
from the flock. No further losses occurred on 12 of the 36 ranches (33 percent) after use of dogs.  On 
12 ranches (33 percent), losses were reduced to 2.0 sheep or less per year. Average losses were reduced 
to 2.0-10 sheep per year on 8 ranches (22 percent). One ranch (3 percent) experienced a loss of 12 
sheep one year and the remaining 3 ranches (8 percent) had pups which had not yet been worked (Table 1). 
There were only two cases in which sheep losses were not significantly reduced. In the first case, the 
rancher bought sheep and two 3-month old pups at the same time in early spring. Coyotes killed sheep 
until July when the pups became 6 months old and gained competency. No further losses occurred after 
July. In the second case, a rancher purchased a 5-month old Great Pyrenees house pet. The dog was 
encouraged to stay with the sheep but was inconsistent because of prior improper training. This rancher 
lost 12 sheep one year, the heaviest loss of the 36 ranchers interviewed. 

Of the guard dogs in North Dakota 26 (48 percent) were female and 28 (52 percent) were male. Three 
of the female dogs were spayed, eleven whelped, six were too young to breed, and five, including the 
female Komondor, were mature but unable to or were prevented from breeding. Four of the 28 males were 
neutered. Most owners thought that unless the dogs were to be used for breeding they should be neutered 
or spayed to reduce wandering. Ranchers did not have any preference for either sex.  There were 22 
ranches which utilized only one dog, 8 with only a female and 14 with only a male. There was a 99 percent 
reduction on the 8 ranches which used single females compared to a 91 percent reduction on the 14 ranches 
which used single males. Some of the difference may be due to a reported tendency of males to wander. 

Most North Dakota ranchers were inexperienced in raising guard dogs. Ranchers who obtained the best 
success bought their $300-400 pups at about 6 weeks of age and raised them with lambs. The dogs were not 
raised as pets or with any other dogs and their natural guarding instincts were allowed to develop without 
substantial human interference. Most pups were initially placed in an escape-proof pen with bottle-fed 
lambs. This early association with sheep was thought to emphasize the guard dog-sheep bond rather than 
the dog-human bond.  Dogs raised with sheep at this early age had a greater tendency to remain with the 
sheep flocks. Actual training of the dog was minimal; "come" and "no" were often the only commands 
taught. Bad behavior, such as roughing lambs, was corrected. As the pups grew larger, many of them 
simply jumped out of the lamb pen and moved to the pasture with the main flock. Others had to be more 
forcibly encouraged to leave the headquarters area. Six pups were whelped in the pastures, remained 
with their mothers, and learned to mimic the experienced dog. They also became very successful guard 
dogs. 

                                                                                                            56 



Table 1. Results of guard dog use in North Dakota 1976-1981.  Information was obtained through interviews 
with ranchers using dogs to guard sheep. 

 

When the young dogs matured their working behavior varied. Most of the dogs remained with the 
sheep or near the fence boundary. A few roamed farther and spent less time directly with the sheep. 
Some dogs brought the sheep back to the headquarters at night and led them to the pasture in the 
morning. Others stayed with the sheep in the pasture during the night but left the pasture during the 
day to return to headquarters for food. The dogs were quite independent and the rancher allowed the 
dog to develop its own guarding behavior. Some ranchers using dogs for the first time had difficulty 
understanding what the dog was doing. 

                                                                            57 

* Got sheep and dogs at the same time.
** Data from ranch numbers 34, 35 and 36 not included because pups were not yet working. 



The exact method the dogs used to reduce losses was not known. Ranchers described barking, marking 
with scent posts, moving sheep away from danger, and actually chasing coyotes, fox, and dogs from the 
pasture in their observations. Some dogs would not tolerate deer, antelope, eagles or other birds, 
horses, cattle, or strangers. Although no actual physical encounters were recorded, one dog was seen 
chasing a coyote for nearly one-half mile. Many of the dogs were seen to enter the pasture or barn 
ahead of the sheep and not permit the sheep to enter until the dog was satisfied that all was safe. 
DISCUSSION 

The nature and extent of depredation reduction attributed to the dog's abilities was often difficult 
to describe. Mere presence of the dog was often sufficient to deter depredation. An example of this 
occurred on a ranch in which no losses were observed until the dog was temporarily removed from the 
pasture for 3 nights for eye surgery; coyotes then killed a lamb each of the 3 nights. The dog was 
returned to the pasture and no further losses occurred.  In another case, the dog was brought home to 
have pups and six lambs were lost before the dog was returned and losses stopped. Dogs were often 
asleep or away from the sheep during the day but were active during periods of likely depredation.  
They were quick to react to any disturbance and sheep often gathered around the dog for protection.  
For example, a rancher, who brought his sheep to the headquarters at night, could not find one of his 
two guard dogs. He returned to the pasture to find the missing dog protecting a remaining ewe and lamb 
from a coyote that was only a few yards away. 

Ranchers had some risk and problems when using guard dogs:  (1) strangers to the pasture had to be 
warned of the dogs, (2) some dogs wandered onto neighbors' property, (3) some dogs injured lambs during 
play, (4) dogs were stolen or accidentally killed, and (5) ADC tools such as traps and snares had to be 
modified to avoid capturing dogs. There was no assurance that the dog would have the instinctive ability 
to guard sheep even when properly raised. 

Most of the ranchers either fed their dogs daily in the pasture or permitted the dogs to eat at 
home. People who use guard dogs recommend that self-feeders be used in the pasture. The feeders should 
be sheep-proof or the dog will guard his food from the sheep rather than guarding the sheep from 
predators. Dogs should not be overfed and should routinely be taken to the veterinarian for care. 

Presently 80 percent of the people who raise sheep in the United States maintain their flocks 
exclusively in fenced pastures or at least during some portion of the year (Gee and Magleby 1976).  In 
North Dakota guard dogs work well under these conditions and it is expected there will be an increase 
in the use of guard dogs. 
CONCLUSION 

Guard dogs have been used as a nonlethal, environmentally acceptable, and economical method of 
reducing depredation. Proper management of sheep and sound husbandry practices, which may include 
utilization of a guard dog, are important aspects of reducing depredation.  It is also widely accepted 
that many behavioral, environmental, and management factors influence the nature of coyote depredation 
and any damage control technique may be effective in some situations but not others. 

A growing number of dogs are being used in North Dakota in conjunction with the operational ADC 
program. The 93 percent reduction of coyote depredation appeared to have resulted from the presence 
of guard dogs. The exact method of depredation prevention used by these dogs is not well known. Only 
time will indicate if the coyotes will learn to circumvent the guard dogs. 
PROPANE EXPLODERS 

A variety of visual or auditory scare devices have been used for years to reduce coyote depredation 
of sheep.  Field observations indicate that nearly any uncommon object placed in a pasture will, at 
least temporarily, affect coyote habits. Examples of devices used include bells, vehicles, scarecrows, 
dogs, electric lights, and propane exploders. Of these devices, the exploder was chosen for utilization 
because of its effectiveness, portability, availability, ease of operation, and relatively low initial 
and operating costs. The exploders were used by sheep producers and Animal Damage Control (ADC) 
personnel as a supplement to, and in conjunction with, a continuing operational ADC program using both 
lethal and nonlethal tools. 

The ADC program in North Dakota has a climate-controlled variable work load. ADC personnel are 
often extremely busy during spring, summer, and fall when sheep are on range pastures. The sheep are 
moved near the ranch headquarters during winter months and the ADC operational workload decreases. 

Occasional exploder use began in the mid-1970s and results appeared favorable. Killing was usually 
delayed or completely stopped on ranches where they were used. Interest developed as results became 
available, and testing was initiated to analyze the effectiveness of the exploders as a control tool. 
The exploders tested and used were the "Scare Away" models 3 and 4 produced by Reed-Joseph International 
Company and utilized propane, a variable firing timer, and electronic or flint ignition. The exploders 
produced a rifle-like noise when a measured amount of propane was ignited at predetermined intervals. 
The price of an exploder was about $200. 

Information on exploder effectiveness was collected from 24 ranches in North Dakota in 1977 and 
1978. When it was determined that coyotes had killed sheep, exploders were placed near sheep bedgrounds, 
along the coyote's approach route, and upwind of the depredation area. The timer was set to fire every 

                                                 58 



7-8 minutes. The landowner was advised to start the exploder before dark, shut it off at daybreak, and 
to change its location every 4-5 days. In all cases exploders were successful in stopping or reducing 
losses until the offending coyotes could be removed. ADC personnel reported that exploders were an aid 
to their operation and that most of the success or failure depended upon how the user operated the 
exploder (Severson, R., USFWS, unpublished data). 

The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's Denver Wildlife Research Center, encouraged by these results 
and after discussions with North Dakota ADC field personnel, made plans to document the effectiveness 
of exploders. A project was initiated to document exploder effectiveness on 10 different ranches with 
known depredation problems. 

A minimum of five verified kills within a 2-week period was required before the study was initiated. 
After five kills, the exploder was placed at the bedground or elsewhere in the pasture. Payments were 
to be made to sheep producers for losses incurred by coyotes as long as exploders were used as the 
sole means of control. The exploder was operated until the grazing season was over or until a minimum 
of two verified coyote kills occurred. At that time, the test on that ranch would be terminated. 

Only three ranches met the criteria of the study and agreed to cooperate. Exploder use was 
documented during the 1979 and 1980 grazing seasons. On the first of the three ranches, three exploders 
were placed in a 255-hectare (630 acre) pasture containing approximately 1,000 ewes and lambs after 5 
sheep were killed within the previous 16 days. The exploders were set to fire at 8-10 minute intervals 
and operated only at night. Killing was subsequently stopped for 17 days. On the second ranch, two 
exploders operated only at night and set to fire every 8-10 minutes were placed in a 182-hectare (450 
acre) pasture which contained 190 sheep after 6 sheep kills had been confirmed during the previous 10 
days.  Killing was stopped for 26 days.  On the third ranch, one exploder was placed in a 24-hectare 
(60 acre) pasture that contained 265 lambs.  A second exploder was placed in an adjacent 32-hectare 
(80 acre) pasture that contained 170 ewes. Both exploders were set to fire every 20 minutes. Exploder 
use was initiated after seven kills occurred during the previous 4 days. Killing was stopped for 102 
days, at which time the lambs were moved to a feedlot (Linhart et al. in preparation). 

OBSERVATIONS 

During the 1980 and 1981 grazing seasons, exploders were used by North Dakota ADC District Field 
Assistants (DFAs) on an additional 30 ranches where coyotes were killing sheep. Coyotes were deterred 
from killing from 1 day to 180 days (average 29 days), at which time the last test was terminated. 
Losses were stopped for the remainder of the grazing season without coyote removal on six ranches 
(20 percent). In seven instances (23 percent), the exploder prevented further losses until the depredat-
ing coyotes were removed. On four ranches (13 percent), no additional losses occurred until the 
exploder became inoperable due to landowner neglect. Losses only occurred when the exploder malfunctioned 
in two cases (7 percent). Killing occurred in the remaining 11 cases (37 percent) with the exploder in 
use; however, coyotes were deterred from killing for an average of 18 days (Table 2). 

Landowners purchased and used gas exploders to prevent losses. For example, two North Dakota sheep 
ranches, each with a history of losses to coyotes, have used exploders for the past 3 years. On one 
ranch, no losses have occurred. On the other ranch, losses have occurred only when the exploders 
malfunctioned or ran out of propane.  At each of these ranches the landowner moved the exploder every 
3-4 days and varied the firing intervals. Each rancher used a different firing pattern varying from 
just a few minutes to occasionally not firing the exploder all night. 

DISCUSSION 

Use of the propane exploder in North Dakota deterred coyotes from killing sheep.  The delay 
provides a longer time period for locating depredating coyotes, thus increasing effectiveness of ground 
control tools and aerial hunting. The delay also allows the DFA to schedule his time more efficiently, 
coordinate his operation, and reduce the cost of control. 

When Service assistance was requested, the DFA determined if the exploders were to be used.  The 
DFA considered workload, area, pasture size, expected coyote population, expected landowner cooperation, 
and acceptance by neighboring landowners. Generally, the depredating coyote or coyotes had to be 
removed and each DFA decided which control tools were used in conjunction with the exploder.  Use of 
the exploder was especially valuable when the DFA had a heavy workload. The exploder deterred or 
reduced losses until other control tools could be used. This allowed the DFA to conduct operations on 
many ranches simultaneously or delay depredations in one area and concentrate efforts where a greater 
need existed. 

The exploder was also placed to shift the area frequented by coyotes or their approach path to the 
pasture. This was especially helpful when there was an access problem on adjacent land or if it was 
difficult to use a selected control tool in certain terrain. The exploder was also used to change a 
killing pattern. For example, if the coyote(s) was killing at night and leaving the pasture before 
dawn, a DFA would fire an exploder through the night until dawn.  The exploder was then shut off and 
the coyote(s) was no longer discouraged from entering the pasture, thereby becoming more vulnerable to 
aircraft or firearms. 

Landowners were encouraged to purchase and utilize exploders to prevent depredations. The exploder 
was especially effective when lambing occurred in range pastures. The exploder was used to prevent the 
establishment of a kill pattern. If the lambs can be protected for even a month, the use of the exploder 
is economically feasible. 

 
59 



Table 2. Results of propane exploder use in North Dakota. Information from 1980 and 1981 on 30 ranches 
where propane exploders were used to deter coyote depredation. 

 

The most important factor determining the success of the tool was user operation and maintenance. 
Results were greatly improved when the exploder was kept operational, moved, and used with different 
firing intervals. Those who operated the exploder as recommended obtained the most beneficial results. 
Another factor which may have increased effectiveness was hunting pressure; the greater the pressure 
the more fear the coyote had of rifle-like noises. 

CONCLUSION 

Propane exploders were not the complete answer to coyote depredation but they did deter coyotes 
from depredating for varying lengths of time. The delay time was used to increase the effectiveness of 
other control tools. Depredation was delayed, reduced, or prevented for the entire grazing season with 
proper exploder use by the landowner. Proper use included changing exploder firing patterns and location 

60 



to prevent habituation by coyotes. The most effective use of the propane exploder was prevention; it 
was easier to prevent the establishment of a kill pattern than to stop the killing after it had started. 
Results of exploder use have varied but usually poor results were due to a lack of effort by the rancher. 
Many times the exploder did a good job in spite of landowner inattention. Service field personnel will 
continue to utilize the exploder as a valuable management control tool in conjunction with other methods 
of control and prevention. 

LITERATURE CITED 

BLACK, H.L. 1981. Navaho sheep and goat guarding dogs: a new world solution to the coyote problem. 
Rangelands 3(6):235-237.  

BORDEAUX, E.S. 1974. Messengers from ancient civilizations. Academy Books, San Diego, California. 
43 pp. 

COPPINGER, L. and R. COPPINGER. 1980. So firm a friendship. Nat. History 89:12-26.  
COPPINGER, R. and L. COPPINGER. 1978. Livestock guarding dogs for U.S. agriculture. Hampshire College, 

Amherst, Massachusetts. 25 pp. 
_____________________________ . 1980. Livestock guarding dogs, an old world solution to an age-old 

problem. Country Journal 7(4):68-77. 
DARWIN, C. 1839. The voyage of the Beagle. P.F. Collier and Son Corporation. 524 pp.  
GEE, C.K. and R.S. MAGLEBY. 1976. Characteristics of sheep production in the western United States. 

USDA Econ. Res. Ser. Ag. Econ. Rep. No. 345. 47 pp.  
GREEN, J.S. 1981. Controlling coyote damage to sheep with non-lethal techniques. Presented at the 

Fifth Great Plains Wildlife Damage Control Workshop. Lincoln, NE. 13-14 Oct. 1981. 
_________  and R.A. WOODRUFF. 1981. In Press. Livestock guarding dogs: developments and current 

status. Proc. Symp. Situation management of two intermountain species: aspen and coyotes. Utah 
State Univ., Logan, 23-24 April 1981.  

LINHART, S.B., R.T. STERNER, and G.J. DASCH. In preparation. Predation of pastured sheep reduced with 
use of nocturnal, intermittent strobe-light and siren device. 

___________________________  T.C. CARRIGAN, and D.R. HENNE. 1979. Komondor guard dogs reduce sheep 
losses to coyotes: a preliminary evaluation. J. Range Manage. 32(3):238-241. 

LYMAN, J.H. 1844. Shepherd dogs. The Amer. Agriculturists 3(11):241-242. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                              
 

61 


	University of Nebraska - Lincoln
	DigitalCommons@University of Nebraska - Lincoln
	2-23-1982

	GUARD DOGS AND GAS EXPLODERS AS COYOTE DEPREDATION CONTROL TOOLS IN NORTH DAKOTA
	William K. Pfeifer
	Michael W. Goos




