Natural Resources and Environmental Issues

Volume 10 Wolves in Utah

Article 7

1-1-2002

Potential strategies for managing Utah's wolf-
livestock conflicts

T. Adam Sw italski

Department of Fisheries and Wildlife, Utah State University, Logan

Trey Simmons

Department of Fisheries and Wildlife, Utah State University, Logan

Shiree L . Duncan

Department of Forest Resources, Utah State University, Logan

Andreas S. Chavez

Department of Fisheries and Wildlife, Utah State University, Logan

Robert H. Schmidt

Department of Environment and Society, Utah State University, Logan

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.usu.edu/nrei

Recommended Citation

Sw italski, T. Adam; Simmons, Trey; Duncan, Shiree L.; Chavez, Andreas S.; and Schmidt, Robert H. (2002) "Potential strategies for
managing Utah's wolf-livestock conflicts," Natural Resources and Environmental Issues: Vol. 10, Article 7.
Available at: http://digitalcommons.usu.edu/nrei/vol10/iss1/7

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Quinney

Natural Resources Research Library, S.J. and Jessie E. at

DigitalCommons@USU. It has been accepted for inclusion in Natural

Resources and Env ironmental Issues by an authorized administrator of

DigitalCommons@USU. For more information, please contact

becky.thoms@usu.edu.

Switalski et al.: Potential strategies for managing Utah's wolf-livestock conflicts

Wolves in Utah 

6. Potential Strategies for Managing Utah’s Wolf-Livestock Conflicts 

6.1. Overview 

The United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) classifies gray wolf populations as 

either endangered, threatened, or nonessential/experimental. Therefore, if wolves enter 

Utah under their current legal classification, the USFWS will be the primary agency 

responsible for wolf management (see Section 2). For the last 30 years, this agency has 

been responsible for managing recovering wolf populations in other parts of the United 

States, both in the Great Lakes and the Rockies. Unfortunately, wolves have come into 

conflict with livestock in all of their recovery areas. As a result, the USFWS has taken 

various measures to minimize these conflicts, while maintaining their objectives to 

continue to recover wolf populations. 

Some of the measures the USFWS has implemented in the Northern Rockies Recovery 

Area for reducing wolf-livestock conflicts include (1) drafting the Interim Wolf Control 

Plan (IWCP) (USFWS, 1988) to serve as a guideline for controlling problem wolves in 

the northern Rockies; (2) classifying wolves in the Greater Yellowstone and Idaho 

Recovery Areas as nonessential/experimental populations, which prompts wolf 

management regulations under separate experimental population rules (Federal Register 

Vol. 59. No. 224) and allows for more liberal management of problem wolves; and (3) 

cooperating with the U.S. Department of Agriculture/Animal and Plant Health Inspection 

Service/Wildlife Services and wolf interest groups (Defenders of Wildlife and Turner 

Endangered Species Fund) for better wolf depredation management.  

The cornerstone of any Utah wolf management plan will clearly be developing strategies 

for minimizing wolf-livestock conflicts, and instituting mechanisms for dealing with 

those that do occur. Niemeyer et al. (1994) advocated the protection of rural interests, 

promotion of public tolerance, and responsible management and protection for wolves as 

key elements in a wolf management program. Responsible wolf management ensures that 

the resolution of wolf-livestock conflicts meets the interests of livestock producers, 

natural resource managers, and the general public. The number of states that have dealt 

with wolf-livestock conflicts has increased dramatically since wolves were put on the 

endangered species list in the early 1970s. Originally, Minnesota was the only state that 

had to address wolf-livestock conflicts; this has now expanded to include Wisconsin, 

Michigan, Montana, Idaho, Wyoming, Arizona, and New Mexico. We have gleaned 

information from existing wolf management plans from around the U.S. and from the 

literature and here offer guidelines for preventing and reacting to wolf-livestock conflicts 

(e.g., MGWRT, 1997; WWAC, 1999; ID LWOC, 2000; MN DNR, 2001; MT DFWP, 

2001). In general, we recommend a two-pronged approach: (1) preventing wolf 

depredations on livestock and (2) implementing wolf control. 

6.2. Preventing Wolf Depredations on Livestock  

A number of techniques have been used to minimize livestock depredation; however, 

they vary widely in effectiveness, selectivity, and humaneness (Cluff and Murray, 1995). 

Even effective techniques are not applicable in every situation, and therefore effective 

Published by DigitalCommons@USU, 2002

1

31

Natural Resources and Environmental Issues, Vol. 10 [2002], Art. 7

                             Natural Resources and Environmental Issues                              Vol. 10 

predator deterrence requires an integrated approach (Fritts et al., 1992). Some of these 

methods have only been studied for their effectiveness in deterring predation by coyotes 

(Wagner, 1988; Cluff and Murray, 1995; and Knowlton et al., 1999), and so their ability 

to deter wolf predation has not been determined. However, coyotes and wolves share 

many morphological, behavioral, physiological, and sensory attributes, and therefore the 

results from studies on coyotes may be applicable for wolves as well, at least in some 

cases. In addition, various agencies and interest groups are currently testing new 

techniques, which, although they may prove to be effective, are not reviewed here. With 

this in mind, the following techniques may minimize wolf depredations on livestock in 

areas where wolves and livestock may coexist in Utah.  

• 

• 

• 

Altering livestock husbandry practices. Adjustments in livestock-rearing practices 

can be beneficial for the protection of livestock from predators, although their 

effectiveness varies depending on the size and location of pastures and type of 

livestock. Preventative methods include: 

o

o

o

o

o

Removing livestock carcasses promptly from grazing lands.  

Calving or lambing in a confined area (e.g, a fenced pasture), to reduce mother-

offspring separation and therefore vulnerability of neonate livestock (Wagner, 

1988).

Stricter human vigilance or closer proximity (e.g., herding) to livestock herds 

(Davenport et al., 1973a, 1973b), especially during lambing and calving.  

Adequate fencing when possible, including antipredator electric fencing (Gates et 

al., 1978; Linhart et al., 1982; Acorn and Dorrance, 1994), to keep predators out 

of livestock areas.  

Synchronized lambing and calving to reduce the period of maximum vulnerability 

in lambs and calves (Knowlton et al., 1999).

Using livestock guarding dogs. For centuries, some breeds of domestic dogs have 

been bred specifically for the protection of livestock (e.g., Hungarian Komondor and 

Great Pyrenees). Although they are known to be helpful in minimizing predation by 

coyotes, little empirical evidence is available demonstrating that livestock-guarding 

dogs mitigate wolf depredation in the United States (e.g., Coppinger and Coppinger 

1995). However, M. Smith et al. (2000) discuss potential strategies for using 

livestock-guarding dogs effectively with wolves. For coyotes, livestock-guarding 

dogs work by being attentive to livestock and fending off intruders (McGrew and 

Blakesley, 1982), whereas for wolves these dogs may establish territories excluding 

wolves, or may distract wolves and disrupt their normal predatory sequence (M. 

Smith et al., 2000). It should be noted that few, if any, guard dogs specifically trained 

to defend livestock against wolf depredation have been used in the United States. 

Such training might increase the effectiveness of guard dogs in reducing wolf 

depredations.

Relocating livestock into other grazing lands. It is possible that in some areas 

livestock will graze in habitats where the management of wolves will be biologically 

or politically difficult. Therefore, in these cases, it may be beneficial to move 

32 

http://digitalcommons.usu.edu/nrei/vol10/iss1/7

2

 
Switalski et al.: Potential strategies for managing Utah's wolf-livestock conflicts

Wolves in Utah 

• 

livestock to other grazing areas where the risk from wolf depredations will be smaller 

or non-existent, or where wolves can be more easily managed.

Relocating wolves into other areas or stocking grazing lands with native 

ungulates. It is also possible that in some areas livestock may graze in habitats where 

they may be the most abundant large prey species for wolves. In these cases, removal 

of wolves might be the best approach. For example, the USFWS recently relocated 

Yellowstone’s Boulder Mountain wolf pack when they denned near a private grazing 

operation. On the other hand, if the continuing presence of wolves in such an area is 

the preferred policy, then stocking with native ungulates might reduce the impacts of 

wolf depredation on livestock. This was recommended for reducing wolf 

depredations on livestock in northern Portugal, where native ungulates were at very 

low densities and livestock production was intensive (Vos, 2000). However, given 

the limited evidence, it is difficult to determine how effective this approach might be 

for Utah.

6.3. Implementing Wolf Control  

In 1999, the revised Interim Wolf Control Plan (IWCP) defined wolf control as the 

(a) application of aversive conditioning techniques to problem wolves; (b) 

capturing problem wolves on Federal, state or private lands, radio tagging and 

releasing them on site; (c) relocating problem wolves to remote areas; (d) placing 

problem wolves in captivity; or (e) killing problem wolves. (USFWS, 1999, p.4)  

In order to minimize depredation events following wolf recolonization in Utah, it is vital 

that a well-planned wolf control program be ready for pending conflicts between wolves 

and livestock. The IWCP elucidated this argument very convincingly, not only for the 

northern U.S. Rocky Mountain region but also for any area that has the potential for 

wolf-livestock conflicts to occur: 

Application of a practical, responsive management program including control is 

essential to the recovery effort. Implementation of a control program will enhance 

the general survival of the wolf by showing that responsible Federal agencies will 

act quickly to resolve depredation problems. Timely response to depredations will 

alleviate the perception of Government inaction that often results in landowner 

frustration, which, in turn, may lead to the indiscriminate killing of wolves. 

Removal of problem animals does more than stop the depredation. It relieves the 

pressures or antagonisms directed toward the total population by the landowner(s) 

incurring the losses or other members of the public. Consequently, the local 

(wolf) population is in less danger from potential nonselective illegal attempts at 

damage control. In addition, control actions will focus on control of problem 

wolves and, in doing so, will resolve wolf/human conflicts through removal of a 

minimum number of wolves. Based on the low rates of livestock depredation in 

northwestern Montana and the availability of ungulate biomass, the number of 

wolves killed under this wolf control strategy is not likely to impede overall 

recovery efforts though temporary reductions in local areas may occasionally 

occur, as in 1997. The Service's biological opinion on the draft Control Plan, 

Published by DigitalCommons@USU, 2002

3

33

Natural Resources and Environmental Issues, Vol. 10 [2002], Art. 7

                             Natural Resources and Environmental Issues                              Vol. 10 

August 5, 1988, concluded that the proposed action is not likely to jeopardize the 

continued existence of the wolf. The biological opinion on the modified Control 

Plan, July 22, 1999, reached the same conclusion. By enhancing the survival 

chances of those non-offending wolves and removing those wolves that do kill 

livestock, the control program will contribute to the ultimate recovery of the wolf 

in . . . the Rocky Mountains. (USFWS, 1999, p.6) 

Until the USFWS decides that another agency is responsible, we assume that they will be 

the primary agency for wolf management in Utah.  Furthermore, Wildlife Services has 

provided wolf control specialists for other wolf recovery areas. Therefore, for the purpose 

of these recommendations we have assumed that they will continue these services. We 

recommend a two-step approach for wolf control actions. These recommendations are 

similar to those in the IWCP. First, it is necessary to identify whether or not wolves are 

responsible for a given depredation event. If wolves are found to not be responsible, then 

no wolf control action should take place. If wolf involvement is verified, then conducting 

wolf control actions will be necessary. 

Verification of Wolf Involvement 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Efforts should be directed toward locating, capturing, radio-collaring, and 

monitoring of wolves in Utah. Intensive monitoring of radio-collared wolves 

would assist wolf control personnel in anticipating conflicts and in locating 

depredating wolves. Telemetry information would inform agency personnel of 

any collared wolves that are in close proximity to a site where livestock were 

damaged or killed. 

Trained specialists from appropriate agencies should be responsible for prompt 

responsiveness (within 48 hours) to reports of wolf/livestock or wolf/pet conflicts. 

To ensure proper verification, wounded livestock or remains of a livestock carcass 

should be present with clear evidence that wolves were responsible for the 

damage.

Before initiating wolf control efforts, there should be reason to believe that 

additional losses would occur in the absence of wolf control.

Before initiating wolf control efforts, animal husbandry practices should be 

verified as being reasonably responsible (“best management practices”) for 

reducing losses to wolves.  

Conducting Wolf Control 

• 

It is difficult to offer recommendations for wolf control without clear population 

objectives for wolves in Utah. Once population objectives have been defined, then 

recommendations for control should mesh with those management objectives. 

http://digitalcommons.usu.edu/nrei/vol10/iss1/7

4

34 

 
Switalski et al.: Potential strategies for managing Utah's wolf-livestock conflicts

Wolves in Utah 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Any non-lethal control, trapping, relocating, or killing of wolves should be 

conducted by authorized personnel from either the USFWS, Wildlife Services, 

tribes, and/or other cooperating Utah, tribal, and federal agencies. 

In the northern Rockies, the IWCP recommends that control efforts should be 

selective for individual problem wolves only, as opposed to local populations. 

Efforts are restricted to within one mile of the depredation site or to identified 

activity centers where the probability of capturing the problem animal(s) is 

maximized within a 10-day period. If depredations reoccur in the area within 

three months, then control efforts are conducted for up to 21 days. Although it is 

not possible to predict how effective these particular parameters may be for Utah, 

we recommend as a first step that Utah adopt similar guidelines for wolf control 

actions.

When efforts to use non-lethal techniques fail or are not desirable and 

depredations continue, lethal control should be used according to USFWS 

guidelines. 

Areas in which problem wolves are to be released or relocated should be decided 

by the USFWS with consent from the proper land management agencies or 

landowners. Relocated wolves should be radio-collared, permanently marked, and 

monitored.

There should be some flexibility for non-agency personnel (e.g., individual 

ranchers) to control wolves if they are frequenting livestock or domestic animal 

areas and represent a threat as determined by wolf control specialists. For 

example, permits for the lethal take of depredating wolves could be issued to 

livestock producers when USFWS and Wildlife Services have not adequately 

prevented further depredations. Wolf control specialists should evaluate these on 

a case-by-case basis.

6.3.1. Wolf Control Techniques 

Wolf control techniques fit into one of two categories: non-lethal or lethal. Below we list 

various techniques that have been used by other wolf control specialists in North America 

and that should be appropriate for Utah too.

Non-lethal

• 

Aversive agents. Aversive agents induce a physiological illness in a predator 

after attacking livestock, producing a learned avoidance by the predator against 

future attacks (Wagner, 1988). For example, researchers have conducted captive 

and field studies using taste aversion with lithium chloride (LiCl), a substance that 

induces vomiting once consumed.  Results were mixed and difficult to apply in a 

field setting (Gustavson et al., 1982; Conover et al., 1977; Burns et al., 1984). In 

Published by DigitalCommons@USU, 2002

5

35

Natural Resources and Environmental Issues, Vol. 10 [2002], Art. 7

                             Natural Resources and Environmental Issues                              Vol. 10 

• 

• 

2001, there were no aversive agents registered by the Environmental Protection 

Agency for mammalian predators. 

Light and sound repellents. Repellents are different from aversive agents, in that 

they don’t require a learned avoidance, but rather rely on a novel disturbance that 

irritates specific sensory systems to repel predators away from livestock. Strobe 

lights, propane exploders, sirens, and recorded sounds all have been tested with 

coyotes and recently with wolves. Light and sound repellents work by discharging 

a novel frightening-stimulus (Linhart et al., 1984), scaring away intruding wolves. 

Results have been ambiguous when tested on wolves in Minnesota (Fritts, 1982). 

Further research on these devices is being conducted in Montana by the USFWS, 

in cooperation with Wildlife Services and the Turner Endangered Species Fund. 

These techniques have been shown to be effective in the short term, but 

habituation may reduce their effectiveness in the long term. 

Other techniques. Relocation of problem wolves may also be a non-lethal 

control technique (see Section 6.2). Additionally, aversive conditioning is 

currently being tested by the Turner Endangered Species Fund. Furthermore, 

many ranchers in the northern Rockies are authorized to use non-lethal munitions, 

including “bean bags,” rubber bullets, and “cracker” shells, to harass potentially 

depredating wolves.

Lethal

• 

• 

Traps and snares. Foothold traps and foot snares do not kill animals and require 

a specialist to kill or release the animal once it has been caught. Neck snares can 

be set to kill an animal by strangulation. They can also be set to capture an animal 

by placing a stop on the snare that restricts closure of the cable. Trap tranquilizer 

devices have been developed to reduce foot injuries to wolves captured in 

foothold traps (Sahr and Knowlton, 2000). 

Aerial gunning. Since wolves are difficult to locate on the ground, aerial 

shooting has been used occasionally as a selective method for removing livestock-

killing predators (Connolly and O’Gara, 1988).

6.4. Conclusion 

When wolves recolonize Utah, some conflict with livestock producers is inevitable. 

Although we do not expect to see significant wolf depredations on livestock in the near 

future, a proactive, integrated approach to reducing any conflicts will be necessary if 

wolves are to be accepted, not only by livestock producers but also by members of the 

general public who may share their antipathy. None of the techniques we discussed has 

been shown to be 100% effective. Instead, each should be thought of as “one tool in the 

toolbox.” A concerted effort to evaluate how and when to apply various methods should 

facilitate the development of a successful, cost-effective program to minimize livestock 

losses. On the other hand, when depredations inevitably occur, it will be just as important 

to have in place an effective program for controlling problem wolves. Such a program 

should include a full range of management options that will be implemented in a timely 

36 

http://digitalcommons.usu.edu/nrei/vol10/iss1/7

6

 
