University of Nebraska - Lincoln

DigitalCommons@University of Nebraska - Lincoln

Symposium Proceedings—Coyotes in the
Southwest: A Compendium of Our Knowledge
(1995)

Wildlife Damage Management, Internet Center for

4-1-1995

ALTERNATIVE METHODS OF PREDATOR
CONTROL

Crystal A. Wilbanks

Texas Department of Agriculture, Austin, TX

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/coyotesw

Part of the Env ironmental Health and Protection Commons

Wilbanks, Crystal A., "ALTERNATIVE METHODS OF PREDATOR CONTROL" (1995). Symposium Proceedings—Coyotes in the
Southwest: A Compendium of Our Knowledge (1995). Paper 5.
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/coyotesw/5

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Wildlife Damage Management, Internet Center for at DigitalCommons@University of

Nebraska - Lincoln. It has been accepted for inclusion in Symposium Proceedings—Coyotes in the Southwest: A Compendium of Our Knowledge

(1995) by an authorized administrator of DigitalCommons@University of Nebraska - Lincoln.

ALTERNATIVE METHODS OF PREDATOR CONTROL 

CRYSTAL A WILBANKS, Te sa s Department of Agriculture, P 0. B o s 12847 , Austin, T X 787 1 1 

Abstract 
Acceptable s o l u t~ o n s to animal damage problems must consider the social and recreational values of 
wildlde, regulat~on of population levels, potential hazards of chemical use, human safety and d~ s t u r b a n c e to biotic 
communities. The objcctive should be to reduce harm and economic loss of 
livestock to an acceptable level. This 
paper, reviews a l te~na t ive , i.e. nonlethal, predator management methods. 
Alternative methods include guard 
animals, fencing, I-epellents, frightening devices and perhaps someday, irnrnuno-contraception. The intent of animal 
damage control should be an mtegrated pest management approach tailored to fit the individual landowner's needs 

Te sa s leads the U .S . in sheep production with 
1.7 million head 
(Te sa s Agric. Statistics Sei-v. 
1995). Another 1 95 n~illion goats resided 
in Texas 
in 1995. This count 
includes Spanish, angora, Boer 
and 
a small number of daily and cashmere goats. 
The Te sa s shecp and goat 
lndustiy is located pri- 
marily in the Edwards Platcau region of the state. 
Rangelands used primarily for sheep and 
goat 
production are f a ~ r l y rugged 
limestone hills with 
moderate to dense brush 

losses to 

Under such c o n d ~ t ~ o n s , predation 
coyotes (Cntirs la/t.utls), d o n i c s t~ c and feral dogs, 
bobcats (Lytir 1 4 1 s ) , gray Sox 
(Ut.oc,von c i t l e ~ e o - 
atgetltells), red fox ([,il/pe.s vr~l/,es), feral hogs (SEIS 
sct.ofa), golden eagle ( ,~ Iq r~ r lu chtysaeros) and other 
predators \yere estimated 
to be 168 ,000 head in 
1994 (Te sa s Agnc S t a t ~ s t ~ c s Se lv 1995) . Coyote 
predation typically accounts for over 50% of preda- 
tor losses Value of I~vestock losses fiom predators 
on sheep 
and lambs in Te sa s amounted to $ 1 . 2 
million 
in 1994 Predation 
is considered as the 
priinaly problem of the sheep and goat industiy by 
many producers 

When 
toxicants were banned 
for predator 
control in the 1970s , many producers ahd research- 
ers began 
to explore other methods of predator 
management. Considerable attention was focused 
on European and Euraslan breeds of 
livestock 
guarding dogs. While the use of dogs was gaining 
populal-ity, many Texas sheep and goat producers 
began to use donkeys and mules as guard animals 
(Walton and F e ~ l d 1989) Llamas have also been 
utilized as an e f k c t ~ v e means of predator deterrent 
(Franklin 1993) , and othcr s p c c ~ c s ( e g. ratites) are 

often promoted for guarding animals 

The goal of predator management should be to 
protect livestock and minimize losses due to preda- 
tors, not nece s sa r~ ly maximizing the take of preda- 
tors. Public opposition to coyote population reduc- 
tions will likely become even more apparent m the 
iuture. 

Livestock guard ing animals 

Dogs . 
Livestock guarding breeds originated m 
E u r o p e and Asia, where they have been used for 
centuries to protect sheep from wolves and bears. 
American stockmen have used guarding dogs since 
the mid- 1970s. Several breeds of dogs have been 
used fo r predator control; no particular breed has 
emerged as the most effective. The more common 
breeds 
include the Great Pyrenees of France, the 
Akba sh and Anatolian Shepherd of Turkey, the 
Maremma of Italy, the Shar Planinetz of Yugoslavia 
and the Komondor of I-Iungaly. Most of the breeds 
range from 7 5 to over 100 pounds and stand 25 
inche s or taller at the shoulder. However, smaller 
mongl-el dogs have also been used successfully, 
especially when accompanied by herders (Black and 
Green 1985 , Coppinger et al 1985) . 

Several research projects have been conducted 
to deteimlne the eflectiveness of the various breeds 
under field conditions. Dog s can be used effectively 
in fa lm flock pastures, on open range and in feed- 
lots 

Gua-d dogs have become a more widely recog- 

nized foim of predator control and therefore have 
increased in abundance and availability. In selecting 
a dog for guarding pulposes, one should consider all 
characteristics of that pal-ticular breed. Such traits 
include behavior, rate of matui-ity, aggressiveness 
and self-confidence, along with gender-specific traits 
and the number of dogs needed for the area to be 
protected. 

Buyers should also consider 
the bloodline of 
the guard dog and pmchase o r lease a dog based on 
a history of proven results. There are many guard 
dog breeders; the Texas D e p a~ tm e n t of Agriculture 
maintains a c w e n t listing of breeders within Texas. 

Guard dogs should be reared with a flock of 
sheep in order to secure a close bond between the 
dog(s) and the livestock. This act IS called socializa- 
t ~ o n and can be 
accompl~slied in vanous ways, 
depending on the dog and your situation. Dogs 
generally mature rather slowly, thus inc rea s~ng the 
need to folm a bond between the dog and the sheep 
be fo re the dog 
is introduced 
to a specific flock of 
sheep. Guard dogs may be pmchased as grown, 
mature adults ready to work, 01- as young puppies 
with little experience. In either case, there must be 
some interaction with the dog and sheep before the 
guard dog is asked to earn h ~ s keep. 

Ideally, pupples should be placed with a flock 
of sheep in an enclosed ciivirontnent s o the pup is 
not allowed to 
leave his flock. 
Pen the newly- 
weaned pup w ~ t h 6 or more sheep for 8 to 16 weeks 
(until the pup reaches 5 months of age) near water, 
bedding ground or other points, whel-e the 
sheep 
ga the r (Lol-cnz and C o p p~ n g e r 1986) Aftel- this 
time , evaluate the dog's c a p b i l l t i e s to d e t e ~ m ~ n e 
when it IS best s u ~ t e d to bc lcl't alone with sheep. 

Some ranchers choose to leave the dog with the 
sheep during 
the day and pen them at night T h ~ s 
allo\vs the puppy to become accustomed to being 
alone with the sheep for extended periods of time in 
an open environment. A pup is usually ready to 
guard livestock at about 8 months of age A good 
lnd~cator that you can leave your dog alone is that it 
stays with the sheep rather than following you as 
you leave the pasture (LoI-enz 1986) . 

associated with guardian dogs 
include feeding, 
veterinary care and mamtenance. Costs associated 
with acqu~sition of the dog a s well as the dog's 
longevity need to be figured in the overall cost to 
your operation. The average life span of a dog is 
10- 12 years. However, untimely deaths take their 
toll during the early years, primarily because of 
a c c~ d c n t s 

Effective use of dogs depends on their training, 
ca re and feeding. Factors to consider in the use of 
guard dogs include: severity of predation 
losses, 
pasture size, livestock habits (i .e . , herding tendency, 
acceptance of dog), expense, the time involved in 
t ra in~ng the dog, compatibility with other predator 
control methods in practice, and also the predator 
control methods used by adjacent ranches 

Dorzkeys arid tr lu les . Though livestock guarding 
dogs have received much attention in recent years, 
other a n ~m a l s (e g., donkeys) are also being used to 
deter predators. Donkeys and mules have been used 
w ~ t h some success to reduce predation on sheep and 
goats from coyotes and dogs (Walton and Feild 
1989). The effective use of guard donkeys capital- 
ize s on the equines' herding ~n s t inc t s and natural 
dislike of, and 
aggsessiveness towards, canines. 
Loud b r a y~ n g may also be helpful in d~ scou rag ing 
some predators 

Unda - proper conditions, guard donkeys can 
p lpv~de a h ~ g h degree of a-ound the clock protection 
aga~nst dogs and coyotes. They may also offer some 
protection against foxes and bobcats. However, 
l a g e r prcdato~s such as mountain lions, gray wolves 
and black and gi-izzly bears ( U ~ s u s spp .) may prey 
on 
donkeys. 
Because individual differences in 
guarding abilities exist among donkeys, management 
practices may need to be tailored to capitalize on 
particular qualities of a donkey 

Donkeys are compatible wlth most trad~tional 
methods of predator control and can be used in an 
integrated predator management program. Because 
they can forage with sheep or goats, are inexpensive 
to maintam, and they have an expected useful life of 
10- 1 5 years a s guard animals. 

T h e cost of a livestock g u a r d~ n g dog varies 
among breeds and breeders, and depending on the 
level of 
maturity and 
t ra in~ng . Comnion costs 

Donkey s me easy t o obtain and can be pur- 
chased from breeders or from auction barns. Most 
often, jenn~e s we sultable for guard animals and cost 

$75 to $150 (I 995 prices) Jacks cost half as much 
a s jennies, but should be neutered before use a s a 
guard animal due to an 
intact jack's aggressive 
behavior to all animals. Proven guard donkeys may 
b e mo re 
espensive . After 
initial acquisition of 
breeding stock, some guard donkey users produce 
their own stock. This practice allows selection for 
donkeys with good g u a r d~ n g tendencies. 

Care and maintenance of donkeys is m~ n im a l . 
Annual health care such as worming and vaccina- 
tion a g a~ n s t common equlne diseases 
is recom- 
mended Supplemental feeding during periods of 
poor range conditions may also be required. Don- 
keys should not be allowed access to feed containing 
ionophore feed a d d~ t i v e s (e .g . lumensin), urea or 
other products intcnded only for ruminants. Other 
vetel-inary care, e g , floating of teeth or hoof trim- 
ming may be needed periodically Average m a ~ n t e - 
nance costs avel-aged less than $70 in 1989 (Walton 
and F e ~ l d 1989) 

I S 

Guard donkeys rcqun-e no special 
tralning 
Ho\vever, bondlng w ~ t h thc l~ve s tock to be protected 
necessaly in some Instances to ensure that the 
donkey will stay w ~ t h the flock. FIalter-breaking and 
teaching a donkey to load in a trailer will increase 
ease of handling. 
Donkeys can be used with rela- 
tive safety in conjunction with snares , traps, M-44 
devices and Livestock Protection Collars. 

Guard 
donkeys 
should 
be 
selected 
from 
medium- to large-s~zed stock Do not use estremely 
small or miniahre donkeys Always select a donkey 
that can be sold or culled ~f 11 falls to p e ~ f o ~ m 
prop- 
erly ( w h ~ c h may PI-eclude a n ~m a l s from such pro- 
grams as the Bureau of Land Management's Adopt- 
a-Burro program) 

Donkeys ~dea l ly should be 
raised with 
the 
a n ~ m a l s they will guard 
If possible, place the 
donkey with die sheep at b ~ ~ t h 
o r at time of weanlng 
Jennies 1\~1~1i 
ncwbol-n foals may be overly protec- 
tlve or too aggressive to sheep 
Further, guard 
donkeys should be mon~ to red during lambing or 
k~dding times as some donkeys may be aggressive or 
overly possessive of the n e \ v b o~ n lan ib sk id s . The 
donkey(s) may he 
temporarily removed In these 
instances Guard donkeys should also be raised away 
from dogs , and the use of herding dogs around 
do~llieys should be avoided 

When placing a donkey into a pasture, isolate ~t 
fiom other equines Donkeys tend to socialize with 
other equines and will stray away from the flock rf 
given the opportunity to mix with other equines. 
Donkeys tend to be most effective when used in 
small (less than 6 0 0 acres) open pastures with not 
more than 200 head of sheep o r goats (Walton and 
Feild 1989) . Large pastures, rough t e r r a ~ n , dense 
blush , too large a herd and sheep o r goats that 
become scattered all 
lessen 
the effectiveness of 
guard donkeys. 

Llat~ras . Llamas (Llattra glattra), like donkeys, have 
a natural dislike for canines. T h ~ s ~n s t inc t allows 
l lama s to work well as guard animals The use of 
llamas as guard animals is not a s extensive a s either 
guard dogs or donkeys at h
s
 time. However, llamas 
are becoming more common, less expensive and 
therefore b e ~ n g utilized a s guard animals more 
frequently 
(F r a n k l~ n 1993) . Research on guard 
llamas has bcen undetway at Iowa State University 
slnce 198 1 with positive results. 

Llamas are generally more expenslve than guard 
dogs and considerably more espensive than donkeys. 
Most guard llamas are gelded males costing $700 to 
$800; intact males are about $ I 0 0 cheaper (Franklin 
1993) . The average l~ f e s p a n of a llama i s 10-1 5 
years . Llamas fit easily into a sheep herd, readily 
foraging on whatever the sheep are eating. They do 
not require special feed, except in t ~ m e s of drought 
o r adverse conditions. Other veterinarian practices 
such as vaccinat~ons and regular deworming are 
recommended. 
G u a r d~ n g effectiveness of llamas 
may be adversely aiTected by hot weather, but proper 
shearing may help with this problem 

Introduction of llamas to sheep has been accom- 
p l~ shed at various ages. Llama breeders traditionally 
wean offspring at 6 - 8 months of age and castrate 
males at 6-24 months of age. In the study conducted 
at Iowa State University (Franklin 1993), nearly all 
llamas had no p r ~ o r experience with sheep before 
b e ~ n g ~ntroduced to the herd they were to protect 
Average age of llamas used wa s 2 years but ranged 
from a few months to over 12 years. Most introduc- 
tions of llamas to sheep required only a few days 
before bonding between species occurred. Many 
producers reported that guard llamas show intense 
interest and attachment to young lambs (Franklin 
1993) . 

Repellents and frightening devices 

Several devices or chemicals have been promo- 
ted a s having utility for d e t e ~ r i n g predation. How- 
ever , the use of d e v ~ c e s to frighten andlor repel 
predators 
i s almost always short-term, ~f any re- 
spon se is noted at all (Lehner 1987 , Shelton and 
Thompson 1975) . Experiences to date suggest they 
offer no real solution to predator problems. 

Various repellents including capsaicin, cinna- 
maldehyde, uiidecenovannillylamie, coal-tar deriva- 
tives and other chemicals have been evaluated as 
either pow-ons or in collars that are attached to the 
target sheep (see surnmaly in Lehner 1987). M. 
Shelton (Texas Agric. Exp . Sta., San Angelo, pers 
cornrnun.) 
reported 
that 
short-term 
relief 
from 
predat~on is sometimes observed after treating goats 
with insecticides used to control l ~ c e 

Predators tend to become accustomed to these 
dev~cedchemicals , therefore most authors suggest a 
diversity or comb ina t~on of methods be used 
Linhart 
(1983) and Lehner 
(1987) sununarized 
research studies involving gu s ta to~y and o l fac to~y 
repellents and concluded that such repellents offer 
little potential for r e s o l v~ n g coyote damage prob- 
lems 

Propane cannons, horns, slrens and radios are 
sometimes used in attempting to repel coyotes from 
lambing grounds These devices may also adversely 
affect the livestock to be protected. They may also 
result In d~ s tu rbance to neighbors and non-target 
species. W h ~ l e sonic repellents usually have only 
s h o r t - t e~m efyects, they are generally conlpatible 
with other f o ~ m s of predator management. 
The 
"Electronic Guard" emits periodic sirens and strobe 
lights and has been used successfully 
t o cu rb 
predation losses on sheep bedding grounds (Linhai-t 
et al . 1984) . 

Aversive conditioning 

Considerable research was undertaken du l -~ng 
the 1970s and 1980s to evaluate the concept of 
aversive c o n d ~ t ~ o n ~ n g 
(Lehnel- 1987 , Olsen and 
Lehner 1978) . 
A v e r s~ v e c o n d ~ t ~ o n i n g ~ n v o l v e s 
dosing a prey item with an emetic compound (e .g . , 
lithium chloride) to produce an induced nausea In 
the coyote. Ideally, the coyote associates the illness 

with the novel food, and lea ln s to avoid that food 
(prey). Although results m field trials varied, aver- 
slve conditioning is generally not con s~de red as a 
viable damage control tool 

Lithium chloride is a chemical that has been 
used 
in research studies conducted In 
the United 
S ta te s and Canada 
It is an emetic, and when con- 
sumed results in the animal experiencing short-term, 
severe gastrointestinal discomfort, usually accompa- 
nied by vomiting. 
Taste aversion has variable 
succe s s in deterring predators 
from 
particular 
species of 
livestock. 
In order to be successful, 
predator must make the association between the 
illness produced and the tzste of the species. 

Ba i t s injected with lithium chloride solution 
may be prepared and placed in strategic locations to 
encourage uptake by predators. Baits should be 
made out of hides and ground mutton from cull ewes 
or 
losses. Carcasses may also be injected w ~ t h the 
solur~on Proponents of this technique rna~ntain that 
coyotes with a condit~oned taste aversion will avoid 
sheep and lambs and also will not teach offspring to 
use sheep as a food source 
These claims are 
speculative and have not been documented by other 
researcha-s. 

Livestock husbandry and management practices 

Several livestock management practices have 
proven to be effective In deterring predators. These 
methods should be practiced in conjunction with 
other forms of predator control. 

Total confinement offers the h ~ g h e s t degree of 
protection, but has it's drawbacks These include 
increased cost of feed, disease control, quality of 
wool and mohair production, increased labor costs, 
etc. Thus, total confinement 1s impractical for range 
operations 
Shed birthing of lambs and kids pro- 
vides protection at the most vulnerable age T h ~ s 
method requires increased c a p~ t a l investment and 
costs associated with labor and d ~ s e a s e control, but 
these costs may be offset by an Increase in lamb and 
kid crops 

Predators often respond to the most abundant 
and available food source , therefore, alternating 
lamb~ng and k~ d d i n g seasons 
to prevent a build-up 
of predators dependent on this food source may 

result in a decrease in predation. Coyotes typically 
whelp in the early summer (April-May) and food 
demands of the parents are highest during early- 
summer (Till and Knowlton 1983) . Fall-lambing 
may a v o ~ d the period of greatest demand for food by 
these predators 

Penning of sheep at night may be another 
option . Predation by coyotes, 
foxes and bobcats 
most often occurs p n ~ n a i l y between dusk and dawn; 
therefore, night penning provides protection during 
the perlod of greatest 
\wlnerability This method 
does involve tncreased lahor a s a result of move- 
ment of livestock and maintenance of facilities. 

Removal and proper disposal of dead livestock 
and other sources of can-ion may b e 
helpful in 
reducing ~nc idence of predation by 
r e d u c~ n g the 
attraction of predators to areas used by livestock. It 
also reduces the artific~al food supply available to 
predators, w ~ t h predators becoming less likely to 
develop a taste for livestock. 

S e l e c t~ v e use of pastures is a t e c h n~ q u e rela- 
t~ v e l y easy to ~mp lemen t , given alternate grazing 
lands are available. Some pastures, due to vegetative 
and physiogr-aph~c features or proximity to preferred 
habitat , lend tlien~selves to higher predation rates. 
Changes in seasonal use o r class of livestock used in 
such pastures may p r o v ~ d e some relief. 

Fencing 

The use of convent~onal and electric fencing has 
increased as a predator management method 
be- 
cause of restnctlons o n a l t c~ u n t e methods Various 
types of f e n c ~ n g e s ~ s t s that may be u t i l~zed a s 
predator deten-ents (Shclton and Gates 1987, Linhart 
et al. 1981). 
Fencing is most successful if it is 
implemented before a pattern of movement has been 
e s t a b l~ s h e d by a predator. If coyotes have been 
feeding on a n ~m a l s w t t h ~ n a given pasture, 
the 
construction of a fence w ~ l l probably not deter them, 
as they recogntze these a n ~m a l s as a food source. 

Cost ~Kectiveness of fences is I-elated to the type 
and dens~t); of predators, along with acreage 
in- 
volved and 
land productiv~ty . Other factors that 
contribute to the cost ell'ectiveness of fences are 
construction and maintenance cost , stocking density, 
tel-ra~n and soil type Fencing to ward offpredators 

has been proven to b e most useful and cost effective 
on small, 
level, open pastures with a minimum of 
brush (Shelton 1984 , . 

There are many types of fencing used to manage 
predators; however, the most common types are net 
wire and electric fencing. A fence should be at least 
5.5 feet tall to dtscourage predators from attempting 
t o jump the fence. An overhang on the outside of 
the fence prevents cllrnbing. Digging under the fence 
can be prevented by a buried barb wire or mesh 
apron The mesh size of 
the fence should be a 
maximum of 4 ~ n c h e s by 6 ~ n c h e s , but preferably 
smaller to ensure that coyotes won't attempt to crawl 
through the fence. 

Nehvire may be fatal to livestock and deer after 
feeding through the wire or attempting to jump over 
and becoming entangled T h ~ s optton is also very 
expensive. By using informat~on on s t o c k~ n g rate, 
fencing costs, size and shape of area fenced and 
estimated life of the fence, producers can calculate 
relatively easily the annual per-head costs to deter- 
mine if this approach is feasible (Shelton 1984) 

EIechic fenc~ng may be suitable as temporary or 
pe~manent fencmg Tlus type of fencing will p r o v ~ d e 
a physical b i u ~ i e r as well as , a psychological batrier 
t o predators. T h ~ s 
type of fencing is less expensive 
than net-wre fencing but it requires a higher degree 
of maintenance. 

Modifying existing net-wire fences by adding 
one or more electric wires have proven effective at 
d e t e r r ~ n g coyotes (Shelton 1984 , R o l l ~ n s 1991) . 
T h ~ s may include adding a trip wire to the bottom, 
middle or top of the fence. When adding a wire to 
the bottom of the fence, it i s necessary to place it in 
the proper position. Placing the wire too high or too 
far away f o ~ m the fence may prove to be ineffectwe. 
Generally, the e lec td ied trip wire should be located 
about 8 - 1 0 ~ n c h e s outside the fence and about 6 
inches off the ground. Brush in fencelines may be 
a chronic problem with placing and servicing such 
t r ~ p w ~ r e s . Adding an electrified wlre t o the top of 
a fence will glve added height to the fence and 
discourage climbing by predators 

It should be noted that fencing is not a cure-all 
fo r predator problems; however , w ~ t h proper use 
fencing can b e very effective in a predator manage- 
ment program 

