University of Nebraska - Lincoln

DigitalCommons@University of Nebraska - Lincoln

USDA National Wildlife Research Center - Staff
Publications

Wildlife Damage Management, Internet Center for

1-1-2000

Response of Captive Coyotes to Renardine Coyote
Repellent

D. E. Zemlicka

USDA-APHIS-WS-National Wildlife Research Center

J. R . Mason

USDA-APHIS-WS-National Wildlife Research Center

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/icwdm_usdanwrc

Part of the Env ironmental Sciences Commons

Zemlicka, D. E. and Mason, J. R ., "Response of Captive Coyotes to Renardine Coyote Repellent" (2000). USDA National Wildlife
Research Center - Staff Publications. Paper 805.
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/icwdm_usdanwrc/805

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Wildlife Damage Management, Internet Center for at DigitalCommons@University of

Nebraska - Lincoln. It has been accepted for inclusion in USDA National Wildlife Research Center - Staff Publications by an authorized administrator

of DigitalCommons@University of Nebraska - Lincoln.

. 

RESPONSE OF CAPTIVE COYOTES TO RENARDINE COYOTE REPELLENT 

D. E. ZEMLICKA, and J. R. MASON, USDA-APHIS-WS-National Wildlife Research Center, BNR-163, Utah State 
University, Logan, Utah 84322-52954. 

ABSTRACT: Renardine' is a bone tar product available for use as a coyote ( h i s latrans) repellent in Canada. The 
substance is applied to pasture borders to prevent coyotes from entering and attackiig sheep. Because data regardiig 
the effectiveness of Renardine are lacking, we designed two experiments. In the first, six pairs of coyotes were first 
presented with 400 g of ground meat in two pans (200 gtpan) with false screen bottoms. Beneath the screens were 
absorbent tubes wetted with 10 ml of distilled water. Subsequently, during a treatment period, the absorbent tube was 
wetted with 10 ml of Renardine. Pans were presented for 60 minutes, and the amount of time to consume the meat was 
recorded. 
In the second experiment, six additional pairs of coyotes were fm t presented with 200 g of ground meat 
inside a barrier created with baling twine and wooden dowels. The area inside the barrier was 1 m2, and the twine was 
tied onto the dowels 0.25 m above the ground. During the treatment period, the twine and dowels were painted with 
Renardine. 
In both experiments, all coyote pairs consumed all of the ground meat shortly after presentation. We 
conclude that Renardine probably is not an effective coyote repellent. However, because the active ingredient in 
Renardine is bone tar oil and bone tar oil is deer repellent, we speculate that Renardine may have utility as an herbivore 
repellent. 

KEY WORDS: Ca~is,lufrans, coyote, depredation, livestock, Renardine, repellent 

(March 6-9, 

2000 , Sari D i e g o , C a l i f o r n i a ) 

Proc. 19th Vertebr. Pest Conf. (T.P. Salmon & A.C. Crabb, 
Eds.1 Published at Univ. of Calif., Davis. 2000. 

that 

INTRODUCTION 
Despite high 
interest, few non-lethal methods of 
coyote depredation management are available. Methods 
that do exist (e.g., various husbandry practices, fencing, 
frightening devices, guard 
animals) 
are 
expensive, 
sometimes difficult to implement, and often effective for 
short periods only (Knowlton et al. 1999). While a 
number of sensory (Burns and Mason 1997) and post- 
ingestive (Gustavson et al. 1974) repellents have been 
tested as cost-effective, non-lethal deterrents to predation, 
no effective strategy has been identified. 
Even under 
optimal circumstances, relief is temporary (Lehner 1987; 
Lehner et al. 1976). This lack of success may 'reflect the 
fact 
killing 
and 
consumption 
are 
differently 
motivated; indeed, chemical repellents can readily deter 
coyotes when the act of predation is not the behavior of 
concenl (Werner et al. 1997). 
Recently, 
another 
chemical 
repellent 
became 
commercially available in Canada as a coyote deterrent. 
Renardine 
(Roebuck-Eyot, Bishop Aukland, County 
Durham, United Kingdom) is a bone tar and kerosine 
emulsion originally developed in the United Kingdom as 
a red fox repellent. The label instructions indicate that 
Renardiie is to be applied to pasture borders to prevent 
mammalian predators from entering and killing livestock. 
We designed 
the present experiments to test 
the 
potential efficacy of Renardine for two reasons. 
First, 
bone tar oil is a known repellent for herbivores (Denton 
1967), but herbivore repellents often attract carnivores 
(Mason et al. 1994). Second, there is almost no evidence 
that repellents cause animals to abandon areas, except 
when highly palatable and easily obtained alternative 
foods are readily available nearby (Milunas et al. 1994). 

'Mention of 
trade names 
and manufacturers 
is 
for 
identification only and does not imply endorsement by 
the U.S. Department of Agriculture. 

When alternative foods are scarce or not especially 
palatable, animals typically return to treated areas and 
resume damage (El Hani and Conover 1998). 

MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Tests were conducted between February and May 
1999 in 0.1 ha pens at the Logan Field Station of the 
National Wildlife Research Center (NWRC), located 8 
lan south of Logan, Utah. Twelve male-female pairs of 
coyotes were arbitrarily selected to serve as experimental 
subjects. Throughout the experiment, all animals were 
provided with a normal daily ration of feed (ground meat) 
and water ad libitum. 

Experiment 1 
Six coyote pairs were randomly selected from the 12 
pairs assigned 
to 
the study. 
During a two week 
adaptation period, in addition to their daily feed ration 
on Mondays through Fridays, each pair was given 400 g 
of ground meat in two aluminum pans (200 glpan) placed 
2 m 
inside the entrance to 
the pen. 
Presentations 
occurred about 60 minutes following presentation of the 
daily ration. 
Each pan had a false bottom, fabricated 
frorp a piece of hardware cloth (0.5 cm2 squares). An 
absorbent tube, wetted with 10 ml of water was placed 
beneath the false bottom. Time to consume the feed was 
recorded. 
A 
two week 
test period 
immediately 
followed 
adaptation. 
In addition to their daily feed ration on 
Mondays through Fridays, all pairs were again presented 
with 400 g of feed in aluminum pans with false screen 
bottoms. 
The absorbent tube beneath the screen was 
wetted with 10 rnl of Renardine. T i e to consume the 
400 g of 
feed was 
recorded. 
These values were 
statistically evaluated in a two-factor repeated measures 
analysis of variance (ANOVA). The factors were period 
(two levels; adaptation, testing) and days (five levels). 

Exwriment 2 
The remaining six pairs of coyotes were presented 
with ground meat inside barriers constructed with twine 
and four wooden dowels. 
As 
in Experiment 1, the 
ground meat was in addition to their daily feed ration on 
Mondays through Fridays, and testing occurred about 60 
minutes after presentation of the daily feed ration. The 
area inside each barrier was 1 m2 and the twine was tied 
onto the dowels 0.25 m above the ground. During the 
two week adaptation period, 200 g of meat was placed in 
the center of 
the space 
inside the barrier. 
As 
in 
Experiment 1, the time to complete feeding was recorded. 
During a two week test period immediately following 
adaptation, all pairs were presented with 200 g of ground 
meat inside the twine and dowel barrier after the barrier 
was painted with Renardine. Time to complete feeding 
was recorded. 
Mean times to complete feeding during adaptation and 
testing were calculated. These values were statistically 
evaluated in a two-factor repeated measures ANOVA. 
The factors were period (two levels; adaptation, testing) 
and days (five levels). 

RESULTS 
In Experiment 1, there were no differences among 
days (p>0.25) or between periods @>0.25), and no 
interaction between periods and days ( p > 0.50; Figure 1). 
This was not the case in Experiment 2. 
In that study, 
there were differences among days (F= 3.8; df =4,20; 
p<0.02), and an interaction between periods and days 
(F=4.04; 
df=4,20; 
pCO.01). 
The 
analysis was 
interpreted in terms of the interaction. Tukey post-hoc 
tests showed that times to complete feeding decreased 
during the adaptation period, and remained consistently 
low throughout the treatment period (Figure 2). 

Experiment 1 

Figure 1 . Time to consumption in Experiment 1 by pairs o f 
coyotes presented with water (adaptation) or Renardine (test) 
beneath 400 g
~
ground meat in two pans (200 glpan). Capped 
f
vertical bars represent standard errors o f the means. 

Experiment 2 

14 

1 

Figure 2 . T i e to consumption o f feed in Experiment 2 by 
pairs o f coyotes presented with 200 g of ground meat inside a 
barrier treated with water (adaptation) or Renardine (test). 
Capped vertical bars represent standard errors o f the means. 

DISCUSSION 
We conclude that Renardine failed to repel coyotes 
either when placed just beneath food (Experiment I ) , or 
when used as an odor barrier (Experiment 2). This lack 
of positive findings is consistent with other 
results 
suggesting that often coyotes fail to respond to topically 
applied chemical repellents (Burns and Mason 1997). 
Our 
results 
also 
are 
consistent with 
the broader 
observation that repellents rarely, if ever, prevent wildlife 
from entering areas, particularly when items withiin the 
repellent barrier are highly palatable (Milunas et al. 
1994). 
More generally, while sulfur-containing compounds 
rarely repel carnivores or omnivores, there is mounting 
evidence 
that 
they 
are broadly 
effective 
against 
herbivores, including deer (Milunas et a. 1994), elk 
(Andelt et al. 1992), mountain beaver (Nolte et al. 1993), 
beavers (DuBow et al., unpubl. obs.), and rabbits (Mason 
et al. 1999). There is anecdotal evidence that sulfur- 
containing deer repellents may attract canids (Bullard et 
al. 1978). One plausible explanation for these differences 
is 
that predator odors often contain volatile sulfur 
compounds and 
fatty 
acids 
(Mason 
et 
al. 
1994). 
Accordingly, these substances should invite inspection by 
predators (carnivores and omnivores) because they signal 
the presence of potential competitors or mates. 
Prey 
(i.e., herbivores), on the other hand, should flee sulfurous 
odors because they may indicate the presence of danger 
(Melchoirs and Leslie 1985). 
Alternatively, or 
in 
addition, poisonous plants often emit volatile sulfur 
compounds. Herbivores should avoid these odors because 
they signal toxicity (Mason et al. 1999). 

 
